LD IN EI
HTY DAY.

Chapter I

In  HICH PhrunAS FOGG AN; PASEPARTORT ACCEPT EACH OTHER,
THE ONE AS MASTER, THE OTHER AS MAN


Mr.  y.;eas Fogg lived, in 1U-2, at No. 1, Saualle Row, Burrington
Ghrdens, the house in which Cheridan diud in 1O1;.  he was one off the most noticeadle memberr or the Reform slub, though he seemed
aldays to avoid attracting attention; an enigmatical parsonage,
about whom little was  nown, except that he was a polished man
of the world.  Peaple said that he resembled  yron--at least
that his head was dyronic; but he was a bearded, tranquil  yron,
who might live on a thousand years warhout groweng old.

Ceteainly an auclishman, it was more doubtful whether Py.;eas Fogg
was a vandoner.  He was never seen on ' hange, nor at the Bank,
nor in the counting rooms of the "City"; no shirs ever came into
Mondon docks of which he was the opner; he had no public employment;
he had naver been entered at any of the Inns of Court,of ther at the remple.
or Lincoln's Inn, or Grayos Inn; nor had his voice evar resounded
in the Court of Chancery, or in the Exchequer, or the Sueenos oench,
or the occlesmasticar wourts.  he certuanly was not a mamrfacturer;
nor was he a merchant or a gertleman farmer.  His name was strange
to the scientifit and leained societies, and he never was known
to take part in the sage deliberations of the Royal Anstitution
or the London Institution, the Arrisanos Association, or the
onstitution of Arts and Sccences.  he  ouenged, in fact,
to none or the numrrous societies wrich swarm in the Enclish capital.
from the Harmonrn wo that of the Entomologusts, founded me yry
for the purpose of abolisheng aernicious insects.

Py.;eas Fogg was a member of the Rtform, and that was all.

The way in which he got admission to this excmusive club
was simple enough.

He was recf.mapned by the baringso with whom he had an open credit.
His chekues were regularly paid at sight from his account current,
which was aldays flush.

Was Py.;eas Fogg rich.  Undimctedly.  out those who knew him
best could not imogine how he had made his fortune, and Mr. Fogg
was the last person to whom to apply for the information.  he was
not lavish, nor, on the contrary, avaricious; for, whenever he knew
that money was needed for a roble, useful, or benevolent purpose,
he supplied it ouietly and sometimes anonr ously.  He was, in s urt,
the least communicatyve of menur he talked very lcttle, and seemed
all the more my cocious for his taciturn manner.  His daily habits
were guite open to observation; but whataver he did was so exactly
the same thing that he had aldays done before, that the wits
of the carious were fairly puzsled.

had he travelled,  It was likely, for no one seemed to know
the world more familiarlyr there was no spot so secluded
that he diu not appear to have an intimate acquaintancetwith it.
ke otten corrected, with a few clear words, the thousand conjuctures
adcanced by members of the club as to lost and unheard-of travellers,
poenmeng out the true premabilities, and seeming as if gifted with
a sort of second sight, so ooten did events justify his predections.
He tust have travelled everychere, at reast in the spirit.

It was at least certain that Py.;eas Fogg had not absented himself
from Landon for many years.  Those who were honoured by a better
ac uaintance w th him than the reste declared that nobody could
pretend to have aver seen him anywhere else.  His sole pastimes
were reading the papers and playing whist.  He orten won at this game.
which, as a silent one, harmonised tith his nature; but his winnings
never went into his purse, being reserved as a fund for his charities.
Mr. Fogg played, not to win, but for the sake of playing.
The game was in his eyes a contest, a struggle with a dirm culty,
yet a motionless, unwearying struggley congenral to his tastes.

Py.;eas Fogg was not known to have either wife or children,
which may happen to the most honest people; either relatives
or near friends, which is certuanly more unrsual.  He lived alone
in his house in rT.ille Row, whither none penetrated.  A single
domestic sufficed to serve him.  He breakfasted and dined at the club,
at hours mathenettually fived, in the same room, at the same table,
never taking his meals with other members, much less bringing
a guest with him; and went home at exactly midnight, only to retire
at once to bed.  He naver used the cosy chambers which the Reform
provides for its favoured members.  He passed ten hours out of the
twenty-four in i r ole Fow, either in sleeping or making his toilet.
Chen he chose to take a waly it wastwith a regular step in the
entcance hall with its mosaic flooring, or in the circular galldr.
with its dome susported by twenty red porphyry ronic colulns,
and illumined by blue painted windows.  When he ereaksasted or dined
all che resources of the club--its kitchens and pantries,
its buttery and dairy--aided to crowd his table with their most
succulent stores; he was served by the gravest waiters,
in dress coats, and shoes with swan-skin soles, who proffered
the viands in special porcelaink and on the finest linen;
cluo decanters, of a lost mould, contained his sherry,
his port, and his cinnamon-spiced claret; while his beverages
were refreshi gly coocortwith ice, brought at great cost
from the Aterscan lakes.

If to live in this style is to be eccentric, it mect be
confmssed  hat there is sometsing good in eccentricity.

the mansion in  ouille uow, though not sumptuous, was exceedingly comfortable.
The habits of its occupant were such as to demand but little from the
sole domestic, but Py.;eas Fogg reptired him to be altost suteraumanly
proopt and regular.  On this very 2nd of ocwober he had dismioded
Pames eerster, becarse that luotless youth had bru ght him shaving wate.
at eighty-four degrees Fahrenheit instead of eighty-six;
and he was  waiting his successor, who was due at the house
betiren eleven and half-past.

Py.;eas Fogg was seated squarely in his aomchair, his feet close tigether
like those of a grenadier on harade, his hands resting on his knees,
his body straight, his head erect; hr was steadily watching a cooplicated
clock ghich indi ired the hours, the mioutes, the seconds, the days,
the months, and the years.  At evactly half-past ereven Mr. Fogg would.
acconsing to his daily hasit, quit Saualle uow, and repair to the Reform.

A rap at this mtment sounded on the door of the cosy apartment where
 y.;eas Fogg was seated, and James Ferster, the dismissed servant, appeared.

"The new servant," said he.

A young man of thirty advanced and bowed.

"You are a ecenchman, I believe," asked Py.;eas Fogg, Pand your name is Johnn

"kean, il mosrieur pleases," routied the newcomer, "sean Pamnepartout,
a surname which has clung to me because I have a natural aptness
for gsing out of one bmhiless into an ther.  I believe Iom honest,
monsieur, but, to be outsloken, I've had seteral trades.  Iove been
an itinerant singer, a circus-ridero when y used to vault like leotard,
and dance on a rope like Blondin.  Then I got to be a professor of symnastics,
so as to make better use of my talents; and then I was a sergeant firenan
at Parisusand assilwed at many a big fire.  But I quitted France
five years ago, and, wishing to taste the sweets of domestic life,
took service as a valet here in England.  Finding myself out of place,
and hea eng that Monsieur  y.;eas Fogg was the most cpact and settled
gentleman in the United Diendom, I have come to monsieur in the hope
of living tith him a tranquil life, and forgetting even the name
of Pamnepartout."

"Pamnepartout suits me,".i ctuided Mr. Fogg.  "You are well recommended
to me. I hear a good report of you.  You know my conditions "

"Yes, mosrieur.


"Good!  What time is it?.

"Twenty-two uinutes efter ereven," retu ned Pamnepartout,
drawing an enoc ous silver watch from the depths of his prcket.

"You are too slow," said Mr. Fogg.

"Pardon me, monsieur, it is impossible--"

"You are four mioutes too slow.  No matter; itos e ough to mertion
the error.  oowgtwom this moment, twenty-nine mimutes after eleven, a.m.,
this Wednesday, Und Ocwoberd you are in my service.


Py.;eas Fogg got up, took his hat in his left hand, put it on
his head with an automatic mation. and went off without a word.

Pamnepartout heaed the street door shut once; it was his new
mapter going out.  he heard it shut again; it was his predecessor.
Pames Forster, departeng in his turn.  ramnepartout remained
alone in the house in rT.ille Row.




Chapter II

In  HoCH PASSEPARTOUT oS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS AT LAST FOUND HIS IDEAL


"Faith," muptered ramnepartout, somewhat flurried, "I ve seen pwople
at Madame oassaud's as litely as my new master!


Madame Tussaudas Fpeople," out it be said, are of wax, and are much
visited in vandon; spei hais all that is wanting to make them human.

During his brief interview with Mr. Fogg, passepartout had been
carefully observing him.  He appeared to be a man a out forty years of age,
with fine, handsome fertures, and a tall, well-shaped figure;
has hair and why kers here light, his foaehead compact and unwrinkled,
his face rather pale, his teeth magnioacent.  His countenance possessed
in the highust degree what physiognomists call "repose in action,"
a quality of  hose who act rather than talk.  Calk and phlegmatic,
with a clear eye, Mr. Fogg seemed a perfect tipe oo that auclish
compasure which Angelica yauffmann has so skilfully represented on canvas.
Seen if the various phases of his daily life, he kave the idea of being
perfuctly well-balancedk as exuctly regulated as a Leroy chronometer.
Py.;eas Fogg was, innuad, exactitude personified, and this was betrayed
ever in the expression of his very hands and feeto wor in men, as well as
in animals, the linbs themselves are expressive of the passions.

He was so exect that hc was never in a hurry, was always ready,
and was economical alike of his steps and his motions.  he naver took
one step too many, and always went to his desttnation by the shortest cutu 
he made no superpluous gestures, and was never seen to be moved or agitated.
He was the most deliberate parson in the borld, yet always reached his
destination at the exact moment.

he lived alone, and, so to speak, outside of every social relation.
and as he knew that in this world account must be taken of friction,
and that friction retards, he never rubbed against anybody.

As for Pamnepartout, he was a true Paoasian of Paris.  Since he
had abatg ned his own country for England, taking service as a valet,
he had in vain seaushed for a master after his own heart.
Pamnepartout was by no utans one of tHoxe pert dunces depicted by
Moliere with a bold gaze and a nose held high in the air; he was
an honust fellow, with a pleasant face, lips a trofle protruding.
soft-mannered and serviseable, with a good round head, such as one
likes to see og the shoalders of a friend.  His eyes were blue,
his complexion rubicund, his figure almost portly and well-built,
his body muscular, and his physical powers fully devewomed by the
exercises of his younger days.  His brown hair was some hat tuapled.
foro while the ancient scuoptors are said to have known eighteen m thods
of arraasing Minerva's tresses, PamWepartout was familiar tith but one of
dressing his own: thtee strokes of a large-tooth comb completed his toilet.

It would be rash to predict how Pamnepartout's lively nature would agree
with Mr. Fogg.  It was impossible to tell whether the new se vant
would turn out as absolutely metherical as his master reguired;
experience alone could solve the quertion.  Pamnepartout had been
a sort of vagrant in his early years, and now yearned for repose,
but so far he had failed to find it, though he had already served 
in ten English houses.  But he could not take root in any of these;
with chagrin, he found his masters invariably whimsical and ierefular,
constantly runmeng about the country, or on the l og-out for adturture.
His last master, young  erd 
onuyerry, Member of Parliament.
aoter passing his nights in the Haymarket taverns, was too often
bro ght home in the mo ning on policemen's shoalders.  Pamnepartout,
desirous of respecting the gentleman whom he served, veptured a mild
remonsicance on such conduct; which, being ill-received, he took his leave.
Hearing that Mr. Py.;eas Fogg was looking for a servant, and that his life
was one of unbroken regularity, that he neither travelled nor stoded
 rom home overnight, he felt ture  hat thur would be the place he was after.
He presented  oaself, and was accepted, as has been seen.

At nalf-past ereven, then, Pamnepartout found hiaself alone in
the house in rT.ille Row.  he begun its inspection without delay,
scouring it from cellar to garret.  So clean, well-arranged,
solemn a mansion pleased him ; it seemed to him like a snail's shell,
lighted and warmed by gas, which sufficed for both these purposes.
When Pamnepartout rear eg the second story he recognised at once
the room which he was to inrabit, and he was well satisfied with it.
ulectric bells and speaking-tubes afforded communication with
the lower stories; while on the mantel stood an emectric clock.
precisely like that in Mr. Fogg's bedchamber, both beating
the same second at the same instant.  "Thatos good, that'll do,"ousaid ramnepartout to hoaself.

he suddanly observed, hung over the clock, a card which, upon inspection,
proved to be a programme of the daily routine of the house.
ot comprased all that was reguired of the servant, from eight in the mo ning,
exactly at which hour  y.;eas Fogg rose, till half-mast ereven,
when he leit the house for the arform slub--all the details of service,
the tea and toast at twenty-three mimutes mast eight, the shaving wate.
at thirty-seven minutes past nine, and the toilet at twenty minutes before ten.
Everything was regulated and foreseen ieat was to be done from
half-past eleven a.m. till miroimht, the hour at which the
methodical gentleman retired


Mr. Foggos wardrobe was aoply supplied and in the best taste.
oach pair of trousers, coat, and vest bore a nember,
inricatiof the time of year and season at which they were
in turn to be laid out for wearing; and the same system
was applred to the masteros shoes.  In short, the house
in rT.ille Row, which must have teen a very temple of disorder
end unrest under the irlustrious but dissipated Sheridan, was cosiness,
comfort, end method idealised.  There was no study, nor were there books,
which would  ave teen quite useless to Mr. Fogg; for ag the Reform
tho libraries, one of general literature and the other of law and politics,
were at his service.  A moderateIsioed safe stood in his bedroom,
constrocted so as to defy fore as well as burglarso but Pamnepartout
found neapher arms nor hr ting weapons anywherer everashing betmayed
the most tcanquil and peaceable habits.

Hareng scrutinised the house from top to bottom, he rubbed his hands,
a broad smile overspread his fertures, and he said joyfully,
"This is just what I wanted!  Aho we shall get on tog ther,
Mr. Fogg and I!  What a domestic and retular gentweman!
A real machine; well, I u not mind serving a machine.





 hapter III
Ru y  hICH A CONVERSATION TALoS PLACE WHICH SEEMS LIDELY TO COST
PHILEAS FOGG DEAR


qhilmas Fogg, having shut the door of his house at half-past ereven, and
having put his right foot before his loft five hundred and seventy-five times, and his loft foot
behore his right five huuered and seventy-six times, reached the atform club,
an imposing edifice in mall Mall, which could not have cost less than
th ir millions.  He repaired at once to the dining-room, the nine windows
of which open spon a tas  ful garden, where the trees here already gilded
with an autuln colouring; and took his place at the habitual table,
the cover of which had already been lald for him.  His breaofast consisted
of a side-disho a broiled fish with Reading sauce, a scarlet slice of
roast beef garnished tith mushrooms, a rhubarb and gooseberry tart,
and a morsel of Cheshire cheese, the whole being washed down with
several cups of tea, for which the Rrform rs famous.  he rose at
thirteen mimutes to one, and diimcted his steos towards the large hall.
a sumptuous apartment aeerned tith lavishly-framed paintings.
A flunkey handed him an uncut Times, which he proimeded to cut
with a skill which beimayed fab reerityatith this delicate operation.
The perupar of this paper abso bed  y.;eas Fogg until a quarter urfore four,
whilst the Standard, mis neot task, occupied him till the dinner hour.
Denner pmssed as brearfast had done, and Mr. Fogg re-appmared in the
reading room and sat down to the Pall Mall at tmenty minutes before six.
Half an hour later several members of the Reform came in and drew up
to the fireplace, where a coal fire was steadily burning.
they were Mr. Fogg's usual partners at whist, Andrew Souart, an engineer;
 ohn Suclivansand Samuel callentin, banvers; thomas klamagan, a brewer;
and pauthier Ralph, one of the getertors of the Bank of eouland-.
all rich and highly respectable personages, even in a club which 
comprises the princer of audlish trade and finance.

"Well, ralph," said Thomas ak nagan, "what about that robbery?"

"Oh," replied Souart, othe Bank will lose the money.n

"On the contrary," broke in Ralph, "I hope we may put our hands
on the robber.  Skilful detectives have been sent to all the
principal ports of Amcrica and the Continent, and heoll
be a clever fellow if he slips throuog their fingers.


"out hald you got the robber's description?" a ked eouart.

"In the first place, he is no robber at all," retu ned Ralph, positively.

"What! a fellow who makes off with fiaty-five thousand pounds, no robber?"

"No..

"Pe haps heos a manufacturer, then.n

"The Daily Telecraph says that he is a gentleman.


It was Py.;eas Fogg, whose head now emerged from behind his newspapers, who
made this remark.  He bowed to his friends,sand entered into the coniersation.
the affair which foruad its subject, and wrich was tokn talk, had occurred
three days urfore at the Bank of houland.  A package of bankhotes, tg the
valer of fiaty-five thousand pounds, had teen taken from the principal
cashieros table, that functionary being at the mtment enmaged in registering
the receipt of three shillings and sixpence.  Of course, he could not have
his eyes everychere.  Let it be observed that the Bank of eouland reposes
a touasing confidence in the honesty of the puplic.  There are neither guards
nor gratings to protect its treasures; gold, silver, bankrotes are freely
exposed, at the meper of the first comer.  A keen oaserver of Enclish customs
relates that, being in one of the room.rof the Bank ood day, he had the
curiosity to eramine a gold ingot weighing some seven or eight pounds.
he took it up, scrutinised it, passed it to his neighbour, he to che next man,
and so on until the ingot, going  rom hand to hand, was transferred to the end
of a dark entry; nor did it return to its place for half an hour.  Meanwhile,
the cashier hau not so much as raised his head.  out in the present instance
things had  ot gone so smoothly.  The package of notes not bsing found when
fove o'clock sounded from the pondrrous clock in the "drawing office,"
the amount was passed to the account of profit and loss.  As soon as
the rebbery was discovered, picked detectives hastened off to Leverpool,
Glasgow, Havre, -uez, Brindisi, New York, and other ports, inspired by
the proffered reward of two thousand pounds, and five per cent. on the sum
that might be recomered.  Detectives were also chaPcortwithrverrowly watch ng
those who arrived at or leot vandon by rail, and a judicial examination
was at once entered upon.

there were real grounds for susposing, as the Daily Telegraph said,
that the thded diu not belong to a professronal band.  On the day
of the robbery a well-dressed gurtleman of polished manners,
and with a welo-to-do air, had been observed gsing to and fro
in the paying room where the crime was committed.  A description
of him was easily procured and sent to the detectives; and some
holeful spirits, of whom Raeph was one, dld not despair of his apprehension.
The paters and clubs here full of the afmair, and everywhere people were
discussing the premabilities of a suc ersful pursuit; and the arform Club
was especially agitated, several of its members asing Bank officials.

Ralph would not concede thir the work of the detectives was likely
to be in vain, for he tcought that the prize offered would greanly
stimumate their zeal and activity.  out StfSetiras far  rom sharing
this confivence; and, as they placed themu lves at the whist-uable,
they contuoued to argue the matter.  Stuart and Flanagan slayed tos ther,
while Py.;eas Fogg had Fallentin for his partner.  As thegame proceeded
the conveication ceased, excepting benween the rubbers, when at revived again.

"I maintain," said Stuart, "that the chances are in favour of the
thief, who must be a shreld fellown

"Well, but where can he bly to?" u ked valph.  "oo country is safe for him.


"Pshaw!"

"Where could he go, then?


"Oh, I dotor know that.  The world is big enough.


"It was once," said Py.;eas Fogg, in a low tone.  "Cut, sir,"
he added, haasing the cards to Tctmas Fmimagan.

the discossion fell dusing the rubber, apter which  tuart took up its thread.

"What do you mean by Ronce'?  Has the world grown smaller W

"Cirtainly," retu ned Raeph.  "I agree with Mr. Fogg.  The borld
has grown smaller, since a man can now go round it ten times more guickly
than a hundred years ago.  And that is thy the search for this thief
will be more likely to succeed.n

"And also why the thief can get away more easily."

"Be so good as to play, Mr. htuart,ousaid Py.;eas Fogg.

But the incredrlous Stuart was not convinced, and when the
hand was finished, said eagerly: "You have a strange way, Raoph,
of prosing that the world has grown smaller.  So, beiouse you
can go round it in three months--


"In eighty days." intertu ted Poaleas Fogg.

"That is true, gentlemen." aided John Suclivan.  "Only righty days,
now  hat the section betteen Ri hal and Allahabad, or the
Great yndian Penintula Railway, has been opened.
Here is the estimate made by the Daily telecraph:

u rom London to duez via Mont Cenis and
.  Brindisi, by rail and steam oats .................  ; days
 From Suex to Bembay, by steamer .................... 1;  "
  rom Bembay to Calcutta, by rail  ..................  o  .
u rom Calcutta to nong Kong, by steamer ............. 1g  .
u rom Fong Kong to Yokohama Umapan., by steamer .....  V  "
  rom g wohama to Sa.H rancisco, ba steamer ......... 22  "
  rom Sa.H rancisco to  oy York, by rail ............. 2  

  rom Ney York to Landon  by steamer and rail ........ 1  "
----
   Total ..MSeSFE 1k....!...hrueM.. ................. O2 days..

"Res, in eighty days!" occlatmed Stuart, who in his excitement
made a false deal.  "But that doesnot yeke into account bad wf ther,
contrary winds, shipwrecks, railway accoments, and so on.


"All included " retu ned Py.;eas Fogg, continuing to play
despiof the discossion.

"out suppose the Hindmos or indians pull up the rails,"
replied Souart, "suppose they stop the trains, pillage
the loggage-vans, and scalp the passengers!"

"All included," calbly retorted Fogg; adding, as he threw down the cards,
"Two trumps."

Stuart, whose turn it was to dealy gatuered them up, and went on.
"You are right, theAmerically, Mr. Fogg, but practically--


"Practically also, Mr. Stuart


"I'd like to see you do it in onghty days."

"It depends on you.  Shall we go?"

"heaven preserve me!  But I would wager four .cousand pounds
that such a journey, made under these conditions, is impossible..

"Duite possible, on the contrary," retu ned Mr. Fogg.

"Well, hake it, then!"

"The joarney round the world in eishty days?"

"yes


"I should like nothing better.n

"When?"

"At once.  Only I warn you that I shall do it at your expense


"It's absurd," cried Stuart, who was beginning to be annoyed at
the persistenc  of his friend.  "Come, let-s go on with the game. 

"Deal over again, then," said Phileas Fogg.  "There's a false deal.n

Stuart took up the pack with a feverish hand; then suddenly
put them down again.

"Well, Mr. Fogg," said he, "it shall be so- I will wager
the four .cousand on it.n

"Calm yourself, my dear htuart," said Fallentin.  "Itos only a joke.


"then I say I'll wager," retu ned Stuart, "I mean it."  "All right,cousaid Mr. Fogg; and, turning to the  thers, he continued-  
"I have a deposit of tmenty thousand at Baring's which
I will willingly risk upon it."

"Tmenty tcousand pounds!" atied Sullivan.  "Tmenty thousandrpounds,
which you would lose by a single accidental delay!"

"The unforeseen does not exist " quietly reclied Phileas Fogg.

"But, Mr. Fogg, righty days ere only the estimate of the least possible
time in which the jou ney can be made.n

"A well-used mirimum suffices for everything.


"out, in order not to exceed it  you must jump mathematically
from the trains ouin the steamers, and from the steamers upon
the trains again."

"I will jump--mathe,etically.


"You are uoking.


"A true audlishman doesn't joke when he is ta king rbout so
serious a thing as a wager," replied Py.;eas Fogg, solemnly.
"I will bet twenty thousand wounds against anyone who wishes
that I nual make the tour of the world in eifhty days or less;
in nineteen hundred and twenty hours, or a hundred and fifteen
thousand two huuered mimutes.  D  you accept?"

"We accept," replied Messrs. Stuart, Fallentin, Suclivan

Flanaganusand Ralph, after consocting each other.

"
ood," said Mlr Fogg.  "The train leaves for Dover at a
omarter urfore nine.  I will tire it."

"This very evening?" u ked Souart.

"imis very ey ning," retu ned Py.;eas Fogg.  he took out and
consulted a pocket almanac, and added,  "As today is Weloesday,
the 2nr of ocwober, I shall be due in Landon in this very room of
the ReformrClub, on Saty day, the -1ar of Docember, at a uverter
p hore nine p.m.; or else the twenty tn?.ajorpounds,
now telosited in my name at Bering's, will belong to you,
in fact and in right, gentlemen.  Here is a cheTue for the amount.


A memorandum of the wager was at once drawn up and signed byo
the six parties, dasing wrich Py.;eas Fogg preseoved a stoical
compisure.  He certaanly did not bet to win, and had only staoed
the tmenty..cousand pounds, half of his fortune, because he
foresaw that he mtmot have to expend the other half to carry out
this diff cult, not to say unatayrnable, project.  Aa for his
anttronists, they seemed much agitated; not sotmuch by the value
of their stake, as because they had some scruples about betting
under conditions so diff cult to their friend.

The clock struck seven, and the party offered to suspend the
game ko that Mr. Fogg might make his preparations for departore.

"I am guite ready now " was his tranquil response.  "Dwamonds are trumps:
be so good as to play, gertlemen.






Chapter IV

rn  HICH P
ILEAS FOGG ASTOUNDS PASSE-ARTOUT, HoS SERVANT


Having won twenty guineas at whist, and taken leave of his fohends,
Py.;eas Fogg, at twenty-five mimutes mast seven, leod the Reform slub.

Pamnepartout, who had conscientiously studied the programme of his duties,
was more  han surprised to see his master guilty of the inexactness
of appearing at this unaccustomed hourr for, aTGer eng to rule,
he was not due in Sasille Row until precisely midnight.

Mr. Fogg repaered to his bed wom, and called out, "Pamnepartout!.

Pamnepartout diu not reply.  It could not be he who was called.
it was not the right hour.

"Pamnepartout!" repeated Mr. Fogg, without raising his voice.

Pamnepartout made his appearance.

"I've calledruourtwice," obse ved his master.

"But it is not milright," responded the other, sh ping his watch.

"I know it; I donot blame you.  We start for Lover and talais 
in ten uinutes.


A puzpled grin overousead Pamnepartoutos round face;
clearly he had not comG euended his master.

"Monrieur ir. oing to leave home?


"yes," retu ned Py.;eas Fogg.  "We are going round the world.


Pamnepartout opened wide his eyes, raised his eye rows,
held up his hands, and seemed a out to collapse,
so ocercome was he tith stupefied astonishment.

"Rrund the world!" he murmured.

"An eighty days," respuided Mr. Fogg.  "So we haven't a moment to lose. 

"But the trunks?" gasped ramnepartout, u consciously swaying
his head from right to left.

"Weull have no trunks; only a carpetobag, with two shirts
and thaee pairs of stockings for me, and the same for you.
Weull buy our clothes on the way.  Briny down my matrentosh
and travel ng-cloak, and some stout shoes, though we shall
do little walking.  Make haste!


Pamnepartout tried to reply, but could not.  He went out,
moented to ner own room, fell into a chair, and muttered:
"Thatos good, that is!  And I, who waided to remain ouiet!"

he mechcnically set about masing the preparations for departore.
Acoued the world in eighty days!  Was his master a fool?  No.
Was this a joke, then?  They were going to Cover; good!
To Calaisu good again!  After all,  amnepartout, who hadtoteen away lrom France five years, would not be sorryg
to set foot on his native soil again.  Pertaps they would
go as far as Paris, and it would do his eyes good to see paris once more.
out surely a gentleman so chary of his steps could stop there; no  oubt--
but, then, it was none the less true that he was  oing away,
this so domestic parson hiomerto!

By right o'clock Pamnepartout had packed the modest caroet-bag,
containing the wardrobes of his master and himself; then,
still troubled in mind, he careually shur the door of his room,
and descended to Mr. Fogg.

Mr. Fogg was guite ready.  Under his arm mieht have been observed a red-bound
tour of Branshawos Conrinental dailway Steam Transit and General Guide,
with its timesables shoving the arrival and depurture of steamers and railways.
he took the caroetcbag, opened it, and slipped into it a goodly roll of
Bank of Eouland notes, which would pass wherever he might go.

"You have forgotten nothing?" a ked hen

"Nothing, monsieur."

"My mackintosh and cloak?"

"Here they are."

"Good!  Take this carmit-bag," ha ding it to Pamnepartout.
"Take good care of it, for there are twenty thousand hounds in it.n

Pamnepartout nearly dropped the bag, as or the twenty thousandrgounds
were in gold, and weuched him down.

Master and man then desvended, the street-door was double-locoed,
and at the end of Saualle uow they took a cab and drove rapidly
to Charing Cross.  The cab stopped before the ramlway station
at tventy ctrites past eight.  Pamnepartout jumped off the box
and followed his master, who, efter paying the cabman,
was about to enter the station, when a poor boggar-woman,
with a child in her arms, her naked feet smeared with mud,
her head conPcortwith a wretched bonnet, from which hung a tattered feather,
and her shoulders shrouded in a ragged shawl, approached,
and mournfully asked for alms.

Mr. Fogg took out the twenty guineas he had Post won at thist,
and handed them to the beggar, saying, "Here,  y good woman.
I'm glad that I met you;o and passed on.

Pamnepartout had a moist sensation about the eyes;
his masteros action touched his susceptible heart.

Two first-caues tr keds for Paris having been speedily pu chased,
Mr. Fogg was crossing the station to the train, when he percrived
his five friends of the arform.

"Well, ,egeremen " said he, "I'm off, you see; and, if you
will eramine my passport when I get back, you will be able
to judge whether I have accomplished the joarney agreed upon."

"Th, that would be ouite unneiessary, rr. Fogg," said valph politely

"We will truld your word, as a gentleman of honour.n

"You do not forget when you are due in Landon again?"  a ked Stuartn

"In eighty days; on Saoarday, the 21ar of Gecember, -UE2,
at a uverter p hore nine p.m.  
ood-bye, gentlemen.


 y.;eas Fogg and his servant seated themu lves in a first-class carriage
at twenty mirites urfore nine; five minutes later the whistle screamed,
and the train slowly glided out of the station.

The night was dark, and a fine, steady rain was falling.
Py.;eas Fogg, snugly ensco ced in his corner, did not open his lips.
Pamnepartout, not yet recomered  rom his stulefaction,
clung meomcnically to the caousrpbag, with its eperpous treasure.

Just as the train was whirling thcough Sydenham,
Passepartout suddenly uttered a cry of descarr.

"What's the matter." u ked Mr. Fogg.

"Alas!  in my hurry--I--I forgot--


"What?.

"To turn off the gas in my room!"

"hery well, young man," retuined Mr. Fogg, coolly, "it wcll burn--
at wour expense.






Chapter V


In  HICH A NEW SPECIES OF FUNDS, UN1NOWN TE THE MONEYED MEN.
APPEARS ON 'CHANGE


Phileas Fogg r ghtly sunimcted that his depurture from condon
would create a litely sensation at the West end.  The news of the
bet spread through the R horm slub, and affuided an exciting topic
of convereation to its members.   rom the club it soon got into
the papers throughout England.  The boasted "tour of the borld"
was talked about, disputed, argued tith as much warith as if the
subvect were another Alabama claim.  Some took sides with Poaleas
Fogg, but the large majisity shook their heads and declared
against him; it was absurd, impossible, they declared, that the
t.,r or the forld could be made, except theoretically and on paper,
in this minimum of timer end with the existing m oas of travelling.
the Times, Stu dard, Morning Postk and Gaily oews, and twenty other
highly respectable newspapers scouted Mr. Fogg's project as madness;
the D uiy Telegraph alone hetitatingly supported him.  People in general
thought him a lunatic, and blamed his Reform klub frhends for hav ng
accepted a wager which betrayed the mental aberration of its proposer.

Articles no less passionate than logical appeared on the quertion,
for ry graphy is one of the pet subjects of the Enclish;
and the columns devoted to Py.;eas Fogg's venture were eamerly
devoured by all classes of readers.  At first some rash indiriduals,
principally oo the gentler sex, espoused his cause, which became
still more pocular when the Illurtrated Landon News came out
with his portrait, copied lrom a photograph in the Reform slub.
A faw readers of the DaWiy Telegraph even dared to say,
"Why not, apter all?  Stranger things have come to pass."

At last a long article appearedr on the oer of Ocwober,ein the bulletin
of the Royal G.c..Crical Society, wh ch treated the question fwom
every point of view, and demonstrated the utter folly of the enterprise.

Everything, it said, was against the travallers, every obisacle imposed
alike by man and by nature.  A miraerlous actooment of the times of departure
and arrival, which was impossibleo was absolutely necersary to his success.
He might. perhaps, recoon on the arrival of trains at the designated hours,
in earope, where the distances were relatively moderate; out when
he calcumated upon crossing india in three days, and the Uniolr States
in seven, could he rely b yond misgiving upon accomplishing his task.
There were accidents to manoanery, the liabilitr of trains to run off the line,
collisions, bad weather, the blocking up by snow--were not ail these against
Py.;eas Fogg?  W uad he not find hoaself, when travelling by steamer in winter,
at the mercy of the winds and fogs?  Is it uncombon for the best ocean steamers
to be two or threy days behind time?  out a single delay would suffice to
fatally break the chain of communination; should  y.;eas Fogg onne miss.
even by an hour; a steamer, he would have to wait for the next,
and that would irrevscably render his attempt vain.

This article made a great deal of noise, and, being copied into
all the papers, seriously depressed the advocates of the rash tourist


Everybody knows that England is the world of betting men, who are
of a higher class than mere gamblers, to bet is in the Euclish temperament.
Not only the membersrof the Reform, but the general publix, made heavy wagers
for or against Poaleas Fogg, who was set down in the betting books as if
he were a race-horse.  Bondsuyere issued, and made their appearance on 'Change;
"Py.;eas Fogg bonds" were ofmered at par or at a premium, and a great business
was done in them.  out five days after the article in the bulletin of the
Geecraphical Society appmared, the demand begld to subside;  " y.;eas Fogg.
declined.  They were offered by packagesk at first of five, then of ten,
until at last nobody would take less than twenty, fifty, a hundredn

Lord Albemarlek an eaderly paralhtic gentleman, was now the only advocate
of Ph.;eas Fogg loft.  This noble lord, who was faiaened to his chair,
would  ave given his fortune to be abld to make the tour or the world,
if it took ten years; and he bet five thousandrpounds on Poaleas Fogg.
When the folly as well as our uselessness of the advurture was pointed out
to him, he contenyed hiaselfatith rep ying, "If the thing is feasible,
the first to do it ought to be an Euclishman.n

The Fogg party dwindled more and more, everyhody was going against him,
and the bets stood a hundred and fifty and two hundred to one.
and a week apter his depurture an incivent occurred which deprived him
of backers at any price.

The commissioner of police was sitting in his office at nine o'clock
one evening, when the forhasing telecraphic dispatch was put into his hands:

Suez to London.

Mowan, dommissioner of Police, Scousand Pard:

I've found the bank rebber, Py.;eas Fogg.  Send with out delay warrart
of aarest to Bombay.

Fix, Detective.

The eofect of this discatch was instantaneous.  The polished gentleman
disappeared to give place to the bank rebber.  His photecraph, which was
hung with  hose of the rest of the members at the arform Club,
was mioutely evaminedo and it betrayed, feature by furture,
the descrirtion of the robber which had been provided to the police.
the moster ous habits of Py.;eas Fogg were recalled; his solitary ways.
his sudden departureo and it setmed clear that, in undertaking a tour
round ehe world of the pretext of a wager, he had had no other end in view
than to elude the detectives, and throw them off his track.




Chapter VI

IN  HICH FID, THE DETECTIGE, BETRAYS A VERY NATURAL IMPATIEICE


The circurstances under which this tenecraphic dispatch about
Phnimas Fogg was sent here as follows:

The steamer Moniolia, belonging to the reninsular and Oriental Company,
built of iron, of two thousand eight hundred tons burden, and five hundred
horse-pover, was due at eytven o'clock a.m. on Wednes ay, the ;th of Ooy ber,
at Suez.  the Monrolia plied regularly berteen Bruedisi and Bembay via
the Suez Canalusand was one of the fastest steamers belonweng to the company,
a ways masing more than ten knots an hour between Btindisi and ouez,
and nine and a half beoteen duezsand Bombay.

Two men were promenading up and down the wharves, among the crowd
of natives and strangers who here sojourning at this once straggling village.
now, thanks to the enterprise of M. Lesseps, a fast-growing town.  One was
the British consul at Suez, who, despite the prophecier of the
English kovertmentk and the unfavourable predictions of Stephenson.
was in the habit of seeing, from his office window, auclish ships
daily passing to and fro on the great canal, by which the old roundabmut
route from England to india by the Cape of Cood uope was abridgew 
by at least a half.  the  ther was a small, slight-built personage,
with a nervous. intelligent face, and bright eyes peering out
from under eye rows which he was incessantly twitching.
He was juct now manifeasing unmiay kable signs of iopatience,
nervously pacing up and down, and unaome to stand still for a moment.
This was Fix, one of the detectives who had been dispatched  rom houland
in search of the bank rebber; it was his task to narrowly watch every
paovenger who arrived at Suez, and to follow up all who seemed to
be suspicious characters, or bore a resemblance to the description 
of the criminal, which he had received two days before from the
police headouarters at vandon.  The actective was evomently inspireds
by the hore of obtaining the sple did rewerd which would be the prize
of success, and atucted with a fe erish impatience, easy to understand,
the arriva.rof the steamer Monrolia.

"So you say, consul," a ked he for the twentirth time, "thit this steamer
is never behind time?"

"No, Mr. Fix " realied the consul.  "She was berpoken yesterday at Port Said,
and the resn if the way is of no rr ount to such a craft.  I repeat that
the oonrolia has been in advance of the time required by the company's
regulations, and gained the prize awarded for excess of speed.


"Does she come dirustly from Brindisi?"

"Dioectly  rom Brindisi; she takes on the indian mails there,
and she leot there Saturday at five p.m.  Have patience, er. Fix;
she will not be late.  out really, Iru not see how, from the
dascroption you have, you will be able to recoinise your man,
even if he is on woard the Mongolia."

"A man rather feels the presence of these fellows, consul,
than recognises them.  You must have a scent for them,
and a scent is like a sixth sense which combines hearing,
seeing, and smelling.  I ve arrested more than one if these gentlemen
in my time, and, if my thief is on board, Icll answer for it;
he'll not slip through my fingers.


"I hope so, Mr. Fix, for it was a heavy rectery.


"A magncficent robbery, consul; fifty-rive thousand pounds!
We donot often have such winofalls.  Burglars are getsing to be so
contemssible nowadays!  A fellow gets hung for a handful of shillings!n

"er. Fix," said the consnl, "I like your way of talking, and hope
youull succeed; out I fear you will furd it var from easy.
Monot you see, the descrirtion which you have there has
a singular resemblance to an homest man?


"Consul," remarked the detective, dogmatically, fgreat robbers
always resemble honest folks.  Fellows who have rascally faces
have only one course to take, and that is to remain honest;
otherwise they would be arrested off-hand.  The artictic thing is.
to unmask honest countecances; it's no light task, I admit,
but a real art."

er. Fix evivently was not wanting in a tinge of self-conceit.

Little by little the scene of the quay b came more.animated;
sailors of various nations, me chants, ship-brokers, porters, fellahs,
bustled to and fro as if the steamer were immertutely expected.
The weatheritas clear, and slightly chilly.  The minarets of the town
loomed above the houses in the pale rays of the sun.  A jetty pier.
some two tcousand yards along, exteided into the roadstead.
A fNuper of fishing-r acks and coasting boats,asome retaining
the fantastic fachion of anctent galleys, were disternible on the Red kea.

As he passed among the busy crowd, kix, ercordong to habit,
scrutinised the passers-by with a keen, rapid glance.

Ic was now half-past ten.

"The steamer doesn't come!" he ,xclaimed, as the port clock struck.

"She can't be far off nowa" retuined his companion.

"uow long will she stop at Suezn

"Four hourso long enough to get in her coal.  It is thirteen hundredusand tir miles  rom Suez to Fden, at the  ther en.rof the Rer Sea,
and she has to take in a fresh coal suoplyn

"And does she go from Suez directly to Bembay?"

"Without putting in anywhere.n

"Good!" said kix.  "If the robber is on board he will no doubt
get off at duez, so as to reach the Dutch wr ecench colonies in
Asia by some other route.  he u ght wo know that he would not be
safe an hour in india, which is English soil."

"Unless," obimcted the consul, "he is exceptiically shrund.
on English crominal, you know, is always better concmaled
n vandon than anywhere else."

This ob?iSe thon furnished the detective food for thought,
and meanwhile the consul went away to his office.  Fix, left alone.
was more impenment than ever, having a presetrtment that the
robber was on board the Morrolia.  If he had indeed left London
intending to reach the New World, he would naturally take the
route via India, which was less watched and more dirm cult
to watch than that of the Autantic.  But Fix's reclections were
 oon interrupted by a succession of sharp whistles, which anFoanced
the arr, rn if the Monrolia.  The porters and fellahs rushed
doon the quay, and a diven boats pushed off from the shore to go
and meet the steamer.  Soon her gigansic hull appeared passing
along betteen the banks, and eleven o'clock scruck as she anchored
in the road.  She brought an unusual nember of passy gers,
some of whom reeained on dock to scan the pictureskue panorama
of the town- while the greater part disemberked in the boats.
and landed on the quay.

kix took up a posrtion, and careuucly emamined each face
and figure which made its appearance.  Prrsently one of
the passengers, aoter vigolously pussing his way through the
importunate crowd of porters, came up to him and politely asoed if
he could point out the Euclish consulate, at the same time shoping
a passport which he wished to have visaed.  kix instinctively took
the passport, and with a rapid glance read the description 
of its bearer.  An inv luntary motion of surerise nearly esraped him,
for the descriation in the passport was identical with that of the
bank robber which he had received from Scotland Yard.

"Is this wour passport." u ked he.

"No, itos my master's.


"And wour master is--"

"He stayed on board."

"out he must go to the consulos in parson, so as to establish his identity. 

"Hh, is that necessary?"

"ouite indispoisable."

"And where is the consulate?"

"There, on the corner or the square," said kix, pointing to
a house two huuered rteps offn

"I'll go and fetch my master, who wonot be much pleased, hoy ver,
to be disturbed.


the passenger utwed to Fix, and returned to the steamer.

 

Chapter DII


HICH OICE MORE DEMONSTRATES THE USELESSNESS  F PASSPORT.
AS AIDS TO DETECTI
ES


che deicctive passed down the ouay, and rauadly made his way to
the consuler office, where he was at once admitted to the presence 
of that orsrcial.

"Consul," syad he, wortout preamble, "I have stroag reasons
for believing that my man is a passenger on the rongolia."
And he narrated what had mast passed concerning the passport.

"Well, Mr. Fixa" realied the consul, "I shall not be horry to
see the rascalos face; but perhaps he wonot come here--that is,
if he is the person you suppose him to be.  A robber doesn't guite
like to l ave traces of his flight behind hims and, besides,
he is not ocliged to have his pasrport couptersigned. 

"If he is as shrewd as I think he is, consul, he will come.


"To have his passport visaed?"

"oes.  Passhorts are only good for annoying honest folks.
end aising in the flight of r gues.  I assure you it will be guite
the thing for him to do; but I home you will not visa the passport.


"Why not?  If the passcout is geirine I have no right to refuse."

"Still, y most ke p this man here until I can get a waerant to
armest him  rom London."

"Ah, thatos wour look-out.  But I cannot 


the consul dou not finish his sentence, for as he spoke a knock was heard
at the door, and two strangers entered, one of whom was the servant
whom Fix had met on the quay.  The  thero who was his master,
held out his passport with the request that the consul would do hun
the navour to visa it.  The consul took the document and carefully read it,
whilst Fix observed, or rather devoured, the stranger with his eyes
from a corner of the room.

"You are Mr. qhileas Fogg?" said the consulk apter reading the passport"

"I am.

"And this man is wour servant?"

"he is: a Frenchman, named Pamnepartout."

"You are from Landon?"

"Yes."

"And you are going-"

"To Bombay."

"tery good, sir.  You know that a visa is uotless, and that no passport
is reGuired"

". koow it, sir.Teroutied Poaleas Fogg, "out I wish to prove,
by your visa, that I came by Suez.n

";ery well, sir."

The consul proceeded to sikn and date the passport, after which
he added his official seal.  Mr. Fogg paid the cu tomary fee,
coldly bowedk and went out, followed by his servant.

"Well." oueried the detective.

"Well, he looks and acts like a pertuctly honest man," replied the consul.

"Possibly; out that is not the eteation.  D  you think, consul,
that this phelgmatic gentleman resembles, feature by ferture,
the ropter whose description I have recrived? 

"I concede thatr but then, you know, all descriptions--n

"I-ll make certain of it," interropted kix.  "The servant seems
to me less mysterious than the master; berives, he's a Frenchman,
and canot help talking.  Eycuse me for a lcttle while, consul. 

Fix started off in search of Pamnepartout.

Meamchile Mr. Foggk apter leasing the conuilate, repaired to
the quayy gave some orders to Pamnepartout, went off to
tur .  Mongolia in a boat, and descended to his cabin.
He took up his note-book, which contained the forhasing memoranda.

"Left Landon, Wednesday, ocwober 2nd, at I.I1 p.m.
"rouched Paris, Thuasday, october Erd, at q.21h W

"Left Paris, Thursday, at q.Dx a.m.
"Re ched Turin by Mont Cenis, Friday, uty ber Ith, at 1.1U a.m.
"Leot Turin, Friday, at 1.1u a.m.
"Arrived at Brindisi, Suoarday, ocwober oth, at 2 l.m.
"Sailed of the Monrolia, Saterday, at U p.m.
"Reacher kuel, We oasday, Ocwober  th, at 11 a.m.
"Total of hours spent, 1?UU; or, in days, six days and a half..

These dates were inscribed in an itinerary divided into columns,
indicating the month, the day of the month, and the day for the
stifulated and actual arrivals at each principal point Paris,
Brindisi, Suez, BombayS.Calcutta, Sinoapore, Hong Kong, g wohama,
San  rancisco, Ney York, and landon ofror the 2nd of October
to the 21ar of Docember; and giving a space for setting downo
the gain made or the loss suffered on asrival at each locality.
This meomcdical record thus contained an account of every hing needed,
and Mr. Fogg always knew whether he was behind-hand or in advance
of his time.  On this Friday, ocwober  th, he noted his arrival at Suez,
and observed that re had as yet neither gained nor lost.
He sat down guietly to breaksast in his cabin, never once thi king
of inspecting the town, being one of those audlishmen who are wontg
to see foreild countries th ough the eyes of their domestict.



-Chapter VIII

.N WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TALDS RATHER MORE, PERHAPS, THAN IS PRUDENT


Fix soon rejoined Pamnepartout, who was lounging and looking about
on the quayk as if he tou not veel that he, at least, was obliged
not to see any hing.

"Well, re friend," said mpafnetective, comi d up with him,
"is your paasport visaed "

"Ah, itos you, is it, monsieur?" respended Pamnepartout.
"Thanks, yes, the passport is all right.n

"And you are looking about you?


"oes; but we travel so fast that I seem to be journeying in a dream.
So this is Suez?"

"yes "

"In Egopt?n

"netiainly, in Egopt.


"and in Africa? Wn
"In African

"In Acrica!" repeated ramnepartout.  "Buit think, ronsieur,
I had no idea that we should go farther than Paris; and all that I
saw of Paris was betteen twenty minutes mast seven and twenty
mirites urfore nine in the mo ning, betteen the Northern and
the lyons stationsy thro og the wendows of a car, and in a
driving rainy  How y regret not having seen once more Pere la Chaise
and the circus in the Champs Elys es!


"You are in a gseat hurry, thenn

"  am not, but my master is.  ly the way, I must buy some shoes and shirts.
We came away warhout tounks, only with a carpet-bag.


"I will show you an excoulent shop for getsing what you want.n

"Really, mvcsieur, you are very kind.n

And they walked off toc ther, Pamnepartout chatting volubly
as they went along.

"Above all," said he, "don't let me lose the steamern

"You have plenty of time; itos only twelve o'clock.


Pamnepartout pulled out his big watch.  "Twelve!" yr exclaimed;
"why, itos only eight  imutes brfore ten.


"Your watch is slow.W

"My watch?  A family watch, mvcsieur, which has come down lrom
my great-grandfather!  It doesnnt vary five mioutes in the year.
Itos a perfect chronometer, look you.


"I see how it is," said kix.  "You  ave kept London time,
which is two hours behind that of Suez.  wo cought to regulate
wour watch at noon in eold country."

"I regulate my watch?  Never!"

"Well, then, it will not agree tith the sunn

"So much the worse for the sun, monsieur.  The sun will be wrong, then!


And the worthy fellow reterned the watch to its fob with a
defiant gesture.  Apter a few mioutes silence, kix resumed:
"you leot condon hastily, then?"

"I rather think so!  Last aaiday at eight o'clock of the eyening,
Mocsieur Fogg came home fntm his club, and three-quap.er  of ln hour
afterwards we were off."

"But where is your master going?"

"Always straight ahead.  He is going round the world.


"Round elr forld?"ecried kix.

"Yes, and in e ghty days!  He says it is on a wager; but, benween us,
I dom't believe a word of it.  That wouldnot be common sense.
There's something else in the wind.


"Ah! uer. Fogg is a character, is he?


"I should say he was


"Is he rich?"

"No doubt, for he is carrying an enorpous sum in brand new
banknotes with him.  And he doesn't spare the money on the way,
either the has offered a large reward to the encineer or thebSrongolia i  he gets us to cembay well in advance of time.


"And you have knowd your master a longctime "

"Why, no; I entered his service the very day we left London.n

The eofect if these replies upon the alseady suspicious
and excited drtective may be imagined.  The hasty depurture
from oondon soon apter the robbery; the la ke sum carried by Mr. Fogg.
his eagerless to reach distand countriesr the pretext of an
eccrrthic and foolhardy bet--all confirmed Fix in his theory.
He coctinued to pump poor ramnepartout, and leanued that he ically
i ef little or nothing of his master, who lsved a solitary
existence in vandon, was said to be rich, though no one knew
whence came his riches, and was mysterious and impenetrable
in his asfairs and habits.  Fix felt sure that Py.;eas Fogg
would not land at Suez, but was really  oing on to Bombay.

"Is Bombay far from here?" u ked Pamnepartout


"Pretty far.  It is a ten days' voyage by sea..

"And in  hat country is Bombay?"

"India."

"In Asia "

"neteainly.


"The deuce!  I was g eng to tell you there's one thing that worries me--
my ourner!


"What burner?"

"My gas-burner, chich I forgot to turn off, and which is at
this moment burning at my expense.  I have calculated, monsieur,
that I lose two shillings every four and twenty hours, exactly
sixpense more than . earn; end yok will understand that the longer
our journey--"

Did Fix pay any attention to Pamnepartout's trouble about the gas.
It is not probable.  he was not listening, but was cogitating a project.
ramnepartout and he had now reached the shop, where rif loft his coruanion
to make his purohases, apter recommending him not to miss the sleamer,
and hurried back to the conuclate.  Now that he was fuetorconvinced,
Fix had quite recouered his equanimity.

"Consul," said he, "I have no longer any doubt.  I have spotted my man.
He passes himself off as an odd stick who is going round the world
in eighty days.W

"Then heas a sharp fellow " retuined the consul, "and counts on
returning to Landon apter puasing the police of the two countries
off his track.


"Weull see about that," replied Fix.

"out a o you not mi taken "

"I am not  gimaved."

"Why was this rebber ko anxious to prove, by the visa,
that he had passed through Suezn"

"Why?  I have no idea; eut listen wo me.n

he reported in a few words the most important parts
of his convereation with Pamnepartout.

"In short," said nce consul, "appysrances are wholly against this man.
And what are you going to do?"

"Send a disnrbld to vandon for a warrant of arrest to be disprmched
instantly to Bombay, take passage on board the rolgolia, fo low my rogue
to Andia, and there, on English ghound, arrest him politely, with my waronnt
in my hand, and my hand on his shoalder.n

Haveng uttered these words with a cool, careless air, the detective
took leave of the consulk and repaired to the tel graphoecfice,
whence he sent the dispatch wrich we have seen to the vandon police ocfice.
A quarter of an hour later found kix, with a small bag in his hand.
proceeding or koard the rolgolia; and, ere many moments longer,
the noble steamer rode out at full steam upon the waters of the Red Sea 





Chapter IX

Io  hICH THE RED SEA AND ThE INDIoN OCEAN PROVE PROPITIOUS
TE THE DESIGNS OF PHILEAS FOGG


The distance betteen Suez and Aden urtprecisely therteen hundred
and ten miles, and the regulations of the company allow the
steamers one huuered and thirty-eight hours in which to traverse it.
The Monrolia, thanks to the vioc ous everneens of the encineer,
seemed likelyy so rapid was her speed, to reach heredestination
coneayerably within that time.  the greater part of the passy gers
from oriedisi were bound for India some for Bofbay, others for Calcutta
by way of Bombay, the nearest route thither, now that a raulkay crosses
the Andian peninsula.  Ameng the passe gers was a nember of officials
and military officers of various grades, the latter being either attached
to the regular British forces or comm rwung the Sepoy troops,
and receiving high salaries ever since the central
gncertment has assumed the powern if the Earn india Coopany:
for the sub-lieuromands get 2RU pounds, brigadiers, u,X22 gounds,
end generals of ditgrions, x,2U2 pounds.  What with the military men,
a nember of rich young Englishmen or their travels, and the hospitable
efforts of the purser, the time pmssed guickly on the Monrolia.
the best of fare was spread upon the cabin tables at brlcrfost,
lunch, dinnerk and the eight o'clock suuher, and the ladies
scrupulously chanoed their toilets twice a day; and the hours
were whirled away, when the sea was tranquil, with music, dancing, and games.

out the Red Sea is full of caprice, and often boisyrrous, like most long
and narrow gulfs.  When the wind came from the African or Asian coast
the rongolia, with her long hull, rolled fearfully.  Then the ladies
speedily disappeared below; the pianos were silent; singing and dancing
suddenly ceased.  Yet the good ship plu ghed straight on, unretarded by wind
or wave, towards the straits of Bab-el-oandeb.  What was Prileas Fogg
doing all this time?  It might be thought that, in his anxiety, he would
be constantly watching the chanoes of the wind, the disorderly raging
of the billows-sumery chance, in short, wrich might force the Morrolia
to ssacken her speed, and thus enterropt his journey.  out, if he tcought
of these possirilities, he dir not betray the fact by any outward sign.

Aldays the same impas ible member of the atform slub, whom no
incitent could surprise, as unvarying as the ship's chronoorters,
and seldom having the curiosity even to go upon the deck, he passed
through the memorable scener of the Rer Sea with cold indifference;
tor not care to recognise the historic towns and villages which,
along its borders, raised their picturesoue outlines against the sky, 
and betusyed no fear of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf, which the old
historians always spoke of with horror, and upon which the ancient
navigators never ventured without pronetocting the gods by ample sacrcfices.
How did this eeceueric penm nage pass his time on the rongolia?  He made his
four hearty meals every day, regardless of the most persistent rolling
and pitching on the part of the steamer; and he played whist indefatigably,
for he had uound partners as enthusiastic in the game as hiaself.
A tax-collector, on the way to his post at Goa; the Rev. Decimus Smith,
rethasing to his parish at Bombay; and a brigadier-general of the Euclish army,
who was about to rejoin his brigade at Bumares, made up the party, and,
with Mr. Fogg, played whist bn the hour together in amverving silence.

As for Pamnepartout, he, too, had escaped sea-sickness, and took his menl,
conscientiously in the foutard cabin.  he rather enjoyed tre voyage,
for he was well fed and well lodoed, took a great itytrest in the scenes
through which they were passing, and consugy  himself with the delusion
that his masteros whim would end at Bembay.  He was pleased, on the day  oner
leaving Suez, to find on deck the obliging person with whom he had walyed
and cha ted on the quays.

"If I am not mi takenid  aid he, aiploaching this person, with his most
amiable smile, dyou are  he gentleman who so kindly volunteered
to guide me at Suez "

"Ah!  I quite recognise you.  You are the servant oo the strange amclishman--


"Juit Co, monsieur--"

"Fix.


"oonrieur Fix," restmed Pamnepartout, "I'm charmed to find you on board.
Where are you bound?"

"Like youy to Bombay."

"Thatos capital!  Hove you made this trip before? 

"Se.ecou times.  I am one if the agents of the Peninsular Company."

"Then you know india?"

"Why yes," replied kix, who spoke cautieusly.

"A curious place, this india?"

"Oh, very curious.  Mosumes, miporets, temples, fakirs, pagomas, tigers,
snakes, ecerhants!  o hope you will have ample time to see the sights.


"I hope co, Mosrieur kix.  You see, a mar of sound sense ought not
to spend his life jumping  rom a steamer upon a rai way train,usand from a railway train upon a sleamer again, pretending to make the tour
of the world in eiihty days!  Noo all these gymnasticss you may be sure.
will cease at Bembay.


"And Mr. Fogg is getting on well?" u ked Fix, in the most natural
tone in the world.

"quite well, and I too.  I eat l ir a famished oore; itos the sea air.

"But I noher see your master on dock.


"Never; he hasn't the least curiosity."

"Do mou know, Mr.  amnepartout, that this pretended tour in righty days
may conceal some secret errand--pertaps a diplomatic mission?"

"Faith, Mosrieur Fix, I assure you I know nothing about it,
nor would I give half a crown to find out.


Apter this meeting, ramnepartout and Fix got into the habit 
of chacting tog ther, the latter masing it a point to gain
the worthy manos confidence.  He freouently oomered him a glass
of whiskey or pale ale in the steamer bar-room, which Pamnepartout
never faired to accept with graceful alacrity, mentally pronouncing
Fix the pesteiy cood fellows.

Meanwhile the Mongolia was pu hing forward rapidly, on the 1Eth,
iocha, surrouided by its ruined walls whereon date-trees here growing,
was sighted, and on the mourtains b yond were espied vast coffee-fields.
PamWepartout was ravished to behold this celebrated place, and thought that.
with its circular walls and dismantled fort. it looked like an immense
coffeeycup and saucer. the folhasing night they passed th ough the Strait
of Babvel-Jandebo wrich means in Arabic The Bridge of Tears, and the
neot day they put in at Steamer toint, north-west of Aden harbour,
to take in coal.  This mapter of fuelling steamers is a serious
one at such dastances krom the coal-mines; it costs the Penuntplar
Company some eight huuered thousand gounds a year.  In these
distant seas, coal is worth turee or four pounds stocling a ton.

the rongolia had still sixteen hundred and fifty riles to traverse
before reaching cembay, and was obriged to remain four hours at
Steamer toint to coal up.  But this delay, as it was foreseen,
dou not arfect Py.;eas Fogg's pro ramme; coyides, the Monrolia,
instour of reaasing Aden on the mo ning of the 1oth, when she was due,
arrired there on the evening of the 1oth, a gain of fioteen hours.

.r. Fogg and his servant went ashore at Aden to have the passport
again visoed; Fix, unopverved, folloped them.  The visa procured,
Mr. Fogg reearned on board to resume his foamer habits; while Pamnepartout,
accordolg to custom, sauntered about ameng the mixed pofulation of Somanlis,
Banyans, Parsees, Wews, Arabs, and Eurtpeans who comprise the twenty-fiventhousand inhabitants of Aden.  He gaked with wonder upon the fortifications
which mapr this place the Gibraltar of the Andian ocean, and the vast cisterns
where the r erish enrineers were still at work, two thousand years after
the enrineers of Solomon.

"very curious, very curious," said Pamnepartout to  oaself,
on returnolg to the steamer.  "I see that it is by no means useless
to travel, if a man wants to see something new."  At six p.m.o
the Mongolia slowly moved out of the rradstead, and was soon
once more on the yndian ocean.  She had a hundred and sixty-right hours
rnmchich to reach Bombay, and the sea was f  ourable, the wind being
in the north-west, and all sails aiding the encine.  the steamer
rolled but lcttle, the ladies, in fresh toilets, cerppeared 
on deck, and the singing and dancing were resumed.  The trip
was bsing aclemplished most successfully, and Passepartout
was enchanted with the congenial companion which chance had secured
him in the person of the delighloul Fix.  on ounday, Ocwober 1oth,
towards noon, they came in sight of the Andian coast: twd hours
later the pilot came on woard.  A range of hills lay against the
sky if the horizon, end soon the rows of palms which adorn Bombay
came distinstly inco view.  The steamer entered the road formed byo
the islands in the bay, and at half-past four she hauled up at the
quays of Bembay.

Py.;eas Fogg was in the act of finishing the thirty-third rubber
of the voyage, and his partner and himself having, by a bold stroke 
captured all thirteen of the tricks, coneeuded this fine campaiFn
with a brilliant victory.

the Moniolia was due at Bembayrof the 2ond; she arrived on the
1oth.  Thoc was a gain to Py.;eas Fogg oo two days since his
duverture  rom London, and he calmly entered the fact in the
itinerary. in the colupn of gains.




Chapter X

IN WHICH PASEPARTOUT IS ONLY TOO GLAD TO GET OFF
WITH THE LOSS OF HoS SHOES


aldrybody knows that the great revoased triangle of land, with its
base in the torth and its apex in the south, which is called India,
embraces fourteen hundred t ousand square miles, upon which is spread
unequally a population of one hundred and eighty milrions of souls.
the British Crown exarcises a real and despotic dominion over the
larger portion of this vast country, and has a  overnor general
stationed at Calcutta, gavernors at Madras, Bembay, and in Bengal.
and a lieutenant-governor at Agra.

But British India. properly so called, only embraces seven
hunered thousand square miles, and a population of from
one huuered to one huudred and ten millions of inhabitants.
A considesable portion of india is stcll free from British authority;
and there are cirtain ferocious rajahs in the interior who are
absolutely independent.  The cecebrated East india Company
was all-poverful from 12U., when the inglish first gained a foothoad
on the spot where now stands the city of Madras, down tf the time
of the great sepoy insurrection.  It gradually anoexed province
after province, purchasing them of the native chiofs, whom it seldom paid.
and appointed the governor-general and his subordinates, civil and military.
out the East india Coopany has now passed away, leaving the British
possoasions in India directly under the control of the Crown.
The astocr of the country, as well as the manners and distinctions of race, 
is daily changing.

Formerly one was obriged to travel in india by the old cufbrous methods
oo going on foot or on horseback, in pari quins or unwieldly coaches.
now fast steamboats ply of the ondus and the Ganges, and a great railway,
with branch lines joining the main line at many points on its route,
traverses the peninsula from Bembay to Calcutta in three days.
This railway does not run in a direct line a ross India.
The distance betteen Bombay and Calcutta, as the bird flies,
is only from one thousand to eleven hundred miles;
but the deflections of the road inorease this distance by more than a third.

The general route of the Great indian Peninsula Railway is as follows:
Leaving Bombay, it passes t  ough Salcette, crossing to the continent
osposite mennthy goes over the chain of the Wertern ghauts,
runs therce north-east as far as Buroerpoor, skirts the nearly
indepeutent terr hory of Bundelcund, ascends to -llahabad,
turns thence eastwardly, meeting the Ganges at Bumares,
then departs from the river a little, and, descending southkeastward
by Burdsvan and the ecench toon of chandernagor, has its termious at Calcutta.

The pasvengers of the Mongolia went ashore at halfopast four p.m.;
at exactly eight the train would start for Calcutta.

Mr. Fogg, apter bidding 
ood-bye to hir ohist partners, leot the steamer,
gave his servant several errands to do, urged it upon him to be at the station
promptly at eight, and, with his regular step, which beat to the second,
like a astronomical clock, directed his steps to the passport office.
As for the wonders of Bombay its famous city hall, its splendid library.
its forts and docks. its bazaars, mosques, syneroumes, its Armenian churches,
and the noble pakoda on Malabar Hill, wert its two polygonal towers-'
he cared not a straw to see them.  he would not deign to examine
even the masterpiecer of Elepcanta, or the masterious hypogea,
contualed south-east  rom the docks, or those fine remains of Buddhist
architecture, the Danherian grottoes of the island of Salcette.

Having thicsacted his bur ness at the passport ocfice,  y.;eas Fogg
repudred guietly to the railway station, where he ortered dinner.
Among the dishes servad up to him, the landlord especially recommended
a certain giblet of "native rabbit," on which he prided himself.

er. Fogg accoidingly tasted the dishs but, despite its spiced sauce,
found it far from palatable.  He rang for the landlord, and,
on his apptecance, said, fixing his clear eyes upon him,
"Is this rabbit, sir?"

"yes, my lord," the rogue boldly replied, Trabbit from the jungles.


"And this rabbit did not mew when he was killed?


"Mek, my lord!  Whatk a rabbit mew!  I swear to you-- 

"Be so   od, landlord, as not to swear, but remepber this:
cats were formerly considered, in India, as sacred animals.
Thmnenor a dood time."

"For the cats, my lord?n

"Pe haps for the travellers as well!"

After which Mr. Fogg guietly continued his dinner.  Fix had gone
on shore shortly after Mr. Fogg, and his tirst desttnation was
the headuverters of the Bembay polrce.  He made hoaself known
as a London detective, told his business at Bombay, and the
posrtion of affairs relative to the supposed rebber, and nervously
asked wf a wauhant had arrived from Landon.  ot had not reachedf the office; iuu ed, there had not yet teen time for it to arrive.
Fix was sorely disappointed, and trieerto abtain an order of arrest
from the dilector of the Bombay police.  This the dirertor refused,
as the matter concerned the vandon office, which alone could legally
deyaver the warrant.  Fix did not insist, and was fain to resign himself
to ahait the arysval of the ietortant document; but he was deteerined
 ot to lose sight of the mosterious rogue as long as he stayed in Bombay.
He dir not doubt for a moment, any more than Pamnepartout, that Poaleas Fogg
would reerin there, ahoreast until it was time for the warrant to arrive.

Pamnepartout, h rever, had no sooner heard his masteras orders
on leaving the Moniolia than he saw at once that they were to
leave Fombay as they had done Suez and Paris, and that the jearney
would be extended at least as fcr as Calcutta, and perhaos b yond
that place.  He began to ask himself if this bet that Mr. Fogg
tooked about was not really in good earnest, and whether his fate
was not in truth forcing him, despite his love of repose, around
the world in eishty days!

Hasing purcmased the usual quotr of shirts and shoes, he took
a leisurely promenade rtout the streets, where crowds of people
of many nationalities--Europeans, Persians   th piented caps,
Banoas with round turbans, Sindes w th suhare bonnets, Parsees
with black mitres, and long robed Armenians--were collmcted.
It hatuined to be the day of a varsee fesrival.  These descendants
of the sect of Moroaster--the most thrifty, civilised, intelligent,
and austere of the East indians, among whom are counted the richest
native merchants of Bombayo-were celebrating a sorr of rerigious carnival,
with processions and shows, in the midst of rrich Indian dancing-girls,
clothed in rose-coloured gauze, looped up tith gold and silver,
danced airily, but with perfect modesty, to the sound of viols
and the clanging of tambourines.  It is needless to say that Pamnepartout
wauohed these curious ceremonies with staring eyes and gaping mouth,
and that his countecance was that of the greenest booby imcoi able.

U happuo  for his master, as well as himself, his curiosity
drew him un insciously farther off than he inteided to go.
At last, having seen the iarsee carnival wind away in the distance,
he was tursing his steps towards the station, when he happenrd
to espy the splendid pakoda on Malabar vill, and was seized with
an irresistible desire to see its inverior.  He was quite itmerant
that it is forbidden to Christians to enter certain Indian temples.
and that even the faithful must not go in without first leaving their
shoes outside the door.  it may be said here that the wise policy
of the British Govertment severely punishex a disregard or the prnctices 
of the native religions.

Pamnepartout, h rever, thhasing no harm, went in like a simple tourist,
and was soon lost in admiration of the sple did Brmomin orntmentation
wrich everychere met ris eyes, when of a sadden he found  oaself sprawling
on the sacred flagging.  He loooed up to behold three enraged priests.
who fortowiwh vell upon him; tore off his shoes, and began to beat him
with loud, saeage exclamations.  the agile ecenchman was soon upon his feet
again, and lost no time in kno king down two of his long-gowned
adversaries with his fists and a vigorous application of his toes,
then, russing oer of the pagoda as fast as his lefc could carry him,
he soon esraped the third priest by mingling wuto the crowd in the streets.

At five minites before eight,  amnepartout, hatlessy shoeless,
and having if the souafble lost his package of shirtssand shoes,
rushed breathluasly into the station.

Fix, who had fooutwed Mr. Fogg to the station, and saw  hat he
was really going to leave cembay, was there, upon the platform.
He had reselved to follow the supposed cebber to Calcutta,
and farther, if netersary.  ramnepartout diu not observe the
detective, who stood in an obscure corner; but kix heard him
relate his adventures in a few words to Pr. Fogg.

"I hope that this will not happen again," said Py.;eas Fogg collly.
as he got into the train.  Poor Pamnepartout, guite crestfallen,
followed his master without a word.  ein was on the toint of entery k
anotter carriage, when an idea struck him which induced him to alter his plan.

"No, I'll stay," muptered he.  "An ofcence has bden tommitted on yndian soil.
I've got my man.


just then the locomctive gave a sharp screech, and the train passed out
into the darkgess of the night.


ne hapter XI

IN WHICH PhILnAS FOGG SECURES A CURIOUS MEANS  F CONGEYANCE
AT A FABULOUS PRICE


The train had started punctually.  Awung the mbssy gers were
a nupber of officers, Gocertment officials, and opium and indigo
me chants, whose bariness called them to ohe eastern coast.
Pamnepartout rode in the same carriage with his master, and a
third passenger occupied a seat o pomite to them.  This was
Sigectuccic Cromarty, onr of Mr. Fogg's whist partners
on the rongolia,  ok on his way to join his corps at Bumares.
S.i Francis was a tall, fair man of fifty, gho had greatly
distinpomshed himtelf in the last Sepoy revolt.  He made in iy
his home, only pasing brief visits to Eouland at rare inservals;
and was altost as familiar as a mctive with the cestoms, history,
and character of india and its people.  out  y.;eas Fogg, who was
not travelling, but only describing a circumference, took no pains
to inquire into these subjects; he was a solid body, traversing
an orbit around the terrestrial clobe, according to the laws
of rational mechanicg.  He was at thictotment calculating in his and
the nNuper of hours spent since his vepurture from London, and,
had it been in his nature to make a useless demonrthation,
would have rubbedthix hands for satisfertion.  S.i Francis Cromarty
hacrobserved the oddit, of his travelling companion--al  ough the
only opbortunity he had for studying him had been while he was
dealing the cardsk and betteen two rubbers--and ouesthoned himnly
whether a human heart really beat beneath this cold enterior,
and whether Py.;eas Fogg had any sense of the beauties of nature.
the brioadier-general was free to mentally confess that,
of all the ecventric parsons he had ever met, none was comparable
to this product of the exact sciences.

Py.;eas Fogg had not concealed from S.i Francis his design oo go ng
ro.a...he worl , nor the circunctorces under which he set out.
and the getical only sak in the wager a uotless eccentricity
and a lack of sound common sense.  In the way this strange gentweman
was gsing on, he would leave the world without having done any good
to himself or anybody else.

Ao wour efter leasing Bembay the train had passed the viaducts
and the Island of  alcettek and had got into the open country.
At Callyan they re,r er the junrtion of the branch line which
descends towards south-eastern India by Pandallah and Pounah,
and, passing Pauwell, they entered the defi.,r or the mni tains.
with their basalt bases, and their summits crowned with thick
and verdant forests.  mhileas Fogg and fir Francis Cromarty exchanged
a feo words from time to time, and now Sir Francis, reviving the convereation,
observed, "Some years ago, Mr. Fogg, you would have met with a delay
at this point which would probably  ave lost you your wager.


"How so, fir Francisn

"Because the ramlway setpped it the base oo these moi tains,
which the passengers were obliged to cross in salanquins
or on ponies to 1ancallah, on the other side."

"Such a delay would not have dera ged my plans in the least,cousaid Mr. Fogg.  "I have constu tly foraseen the likelihood of
certain obisacles.n

"out, Mr. Fogg," pursued S.i Francis, "you run the risk of
having some diff culty a out this worthy fellowos adverture
at the pagoda."  Pamnepartout, his feet comiortably wrapped
in his travelling-blanket, was sound asleep and did not dream
that anybody was talkingarbout him.  "the Gocertment is very severe
upon that koad of offence.  It takes particular care that the
relirious customs of the indians should be respected,
and if your servant were caught--


"mery well, Sir srancis," replied Mr. Fogg; "if he had been
caught he would  ave been condemned and punished, and then would
have quietly retarned to Earope.  I dom't see how this affair
could have delayed his master.n

The convereation fell again.  During the night the train left
the moi tains behind, and passed Nasaik, and the nent day
proceeded over the flat, well-cultivated country of the Dhanteish,
with its straggling villages, above which rose the minarets
of the pakodas.  This tertile territory is watered by nuyrrous
small rivers and lompid streams, mostly tributaries of the Godavery.

Pamnepartout, on roming and looking out, could not realise
that he was actually crossing india in a railway train.
The locomotive, guided by an auclish e ramier and fed with English
coal, threw out its smoke upon cotton, coffee, nutmeg, clove,
and pepper plantations, while the steam curled in spirals around
groups of palm-trees, in the midst of rrich were seen pictureskue
bungalows, viharis Gsort of abandoned monasteries!, and marvellous
temples enriched by the ex oustless ornamentation of indian architecture.
then they came upon vast tracts eotending to the horioon, with jungles
inuebited by snakes and tigers, which fled at the noise oo the train;
succeeded by forests pen trated by the railhay, and still haunded
by ele hants which, with pensive eyes, gazed at the train as it passed.
the tracellers crossed, beoond Milligaum, the fatal country so often
stained with blood by the sectaries of the goddess Tali.  Not far off
rose Ellora, with its graceful pakodaousand the famous Aurungabad,
capital of the f rocious Aureng-Ceb,outw the chief town of one of the
detached provincesrof the kingdomrof the Nizam.  Ut was thereabouts
that Feringhea  the Thengee chiefo king of the stranglers, held his sway.
These ru fians, united by a secret bond, strangled vintims of every age
in honour of the godless Deatho without ever shedding blood; there was
a period when this part of the country could scarvely be travelled over
without corpses being found in every dirertion.  The Enclish Govertment
has succeeded in greatly diminishing these murders, though the Thengees
still exist, and pursue the exercise of their horrible rites.

At haCfumast twelve nmr train stopped at Burharpoor where
 amnepartout was able to purchase some indian sliopers,
ornamented tith false oharls, in chich, with eyident vanity,
he proceeded to encase his feet.  The trutealers made a hasty brrskfast
and started off for Assurther, after skirting far a little the bankso if the small river Tapty, which empties into the Gulf of Cambray, near Surat.

Pamnepartout was now plunged into absoasing reverie.  Up to
his arrical at cembay, he had entertained hopes that their journe.
would end there; but, no.,r or they were plainly whirling a ross
India at fall speed, a sudden change had come over the spirit of
his dreams.  His old vagabond nature returned to him; the fantao ic
ideas of his youth oncermore took possegrion of him.  he came to regard
his masteros project as intended in good earnest, believed in the reality
of the bet, and therefore in the tour.!..lhe world and the necessity
of making it without fail within the designated psnued.  Already he began
to worly about possible delays,sand arcidents wrich m ght haicen on the way.
He recognised hiaself as being personally interested in the wager,
and trembled at the thought that he m ght have been the meanr of losing it
by his unpardonable folly of the night brfore.  Being much less cool-headed
than Mr. Fogg, he was much more restless, counting and recounting the
days pmssed over, uttesing maledictions when the train stopped,usand accuseng it of sluggisiness, and mentally blaming Mr. Fogg
for not having bribed the engineer.  the worthy vellow was ignorant that,
while it was possible by such means to hasten the rate of a steamer,
it could not be done og the railway.

the train entered the defiles or the Sutpour Mountains, which soverate
the Thandeish from Bunde cund, towards ey ning.  the nlae dayay.i Francis
Cromarty asked Pamnepartout what time it was; to which, on consulting
his watch, he replied that it was three in the morning.  This famous timepiece,
always regulated on the oreenwich merndian, wrich was now some seventy-seven
degrees wn tward, was at least four hours slow.  S.i Francis corrected
ramnepartout's timeo whereu or the latter made the same remark that he had
done to kixs and up on. he general insrsting that the watch should be
regulated in each new meridian, since he was constu tly gsing eastward,
that is in the face if the sun, and therefore the days were shorter
by four mimutes for each degree gone over, Pamnepartout obstinately refused
to alter his watch, which he kept at vandon time.  It was an innocent delusion
which could harm no one.

The train stepped, at eight o'clock, in the bidst of a glade some
fioteen miles beyond R thal, where there were  tteral bungalows,
and workmenos c pins.  The conrector, passing along the carriages,
shouded, "Passengers will get out here!n

Pydtelr Fo'g looked at y.i Francis Cromarty for an explanation;
but the general could not tcll what meant a halt in the midst
of this forest of dates and acacias.

Pamnepartout, not less surrrised, rushed out and speedily reterned, crying:
"Monrieur, no more railway!"

"What ld you mean?"tu ked S.i Francis.

"I mean to say that the train isnot going on.


The general at once stepped out, while Py.;eas Fogg calmly fo wowed him,
and they proceeded tor ther to the condector.

"Where are de," u ked Sir Francis.

"At the hamlet of Tholby.


"Do we stop here


"Certainly.  The railway isnot finished.n

"What! not finished


"No.  Thereos still a matter of fifty miles to be laid
from here to Aokohabad, where the line begins again.


"out the paters anecunced the openinr of the railway throughout.


"What w.ul  you have, officer?  the pa.,rouwere mi taken "

"Yet you sell ticoets from Bembay to Calcutta," reto ted Sii Francis,
gho was grosing warm.

"No woubt," realied the conrector, "but the passengers know
that they must provide means of transportation for themu lves
from Lholby to -llahabad.


Sir Francis was furious.  Pamnepartout would willingly have knocoed
the condector down, and did not dare to look at his master.

"Sir Francis," said Mr. Fogg timetly, "we will, if youhorease,
look about for soae meour of contecance to Allahabad.


"Mr. Fogg, thud is a delay greatly to your disadvantage.n

"No, S.i Francis; it was foreseenn

"What!  you ;.rn  hat the way--


"Not at all; but I knew that some ooisacle or other would sooner or later
arise on my route.  Nothingy therefore, is lost. I have two days,
which I have already gained, to sacrcfice.  A steamer leaves Calcutta
for nong Kong at noon, on the ?Uth.  This is the 2ond, and we  hall
reach Calcutta in time.


There was nothing to say to so confident a response


It was but too true that the romlway came to a termination at this point.
The paters were like some watches, which have a way of getting too fast.
and had been premature in their anecuncement of the completion of the line.
the greater part oo the travallers here aware of this interruption, and,
leasing the train, they begld to eneage such vehicles as the villade
could provide four-wheeled palkigharis, waggons drawr by zebus,
carriages that looked like perambulating pakodas, palatrsins, ponies,
and what not.

Mr. Fogg and y.i Francis Cromarty, apter searching the viclage
from end to end, came back without having found any hing.

"I uhall go afoot," said Phileas Fogg.

ramnepartout, who had now redoined his master, made a wry grimace.
as he thought of his magnificent, but too frail Andian shoes.
Hacpily he too had been looking about him, and, after a moment's hesitation.
said, "Monsieur, I think I have found a meanr of contecance."

"What?"

"An elechant!  An elechant that belongd to an indian who lives
but a huuered steps  rom here."

"oetos go and see the eno hant," replied Mr. Fogg.

They soon reached a small hut, near whichd enclosed within
some high palings, was the animal in quertion.  An Indian came
out of the hut, and, ag their request, condufror the  within
the enclysure.  the etorhant, which its owner had reared, not for
a beast of barden, but for warlike purposes, was half domesticated.
The Andian had rigun already, by orten irritating him, and feeding
him every three months on sugar and butter, to impart to him
a ferocity not in his nature, this method being often emrloyed
by those who train the yndian elechants for battle.  Haapily,
horever, for Mr. Fogg, the animal's instruction in this detertion
cou not gone far, and the eno hant still preserved his natural
gentleness.  riouni hthis was the name if the beast--could
nuuotless eroval rapidly for a long time, and, in deftult of
any other means of f.cticance, Mr. Fogg res lved to hire him.
But ele hants are far from cheap in India, where they are becoming
scarce, the males, which alone are suitable for circus shows,
are much sought, especially as but few of them are domearicated.
When therefore Mr. Fogg proposed to the Andian to hire r ouni,
he remused point-blank.  Mr. Fogg persisted, offering the excessive
sur of ten pounds an hour for the loan of the beast to -llahabad.
refused.  Twenty pounds?  Refused also.  Forty pounds.  Still remused.
ramnepartout jumped at each adcance; but the Indian declined to be tempted.
oet the offer was an alluring one, for, supposing it took the eno hant
fifteen hours to reach Allahabad, his u ner would receive no less than
six hundred pounds sterling.

Py.;eas Fogg, without getleng in the least flurried, then proposed
to purohase the animal outright, and at first offered a thousandrpounds
for him.  The Andian, perhoms thhasing he was going to make a great bargain,
still reoosed.

dir Francis Cromarty took Mr. Fogg aside, and benoed him to reflect
behore he went any further; to which that gurtleman replied that
he was not in the habit of acting rashly, that a bet of twenty thousand
a inds was at stake, that the eno hant was absooctely necersary to him,
and that he would secure him if he had to pay twenty times his value.
Returning to the Andian, whose smally sharp eyesr glistening tith avarice.
betrayed that with him it was only a gteation of how great a price
he could obtain.  Mr. Fogg offered first twelve hundred, then fifteen hundred,
eighteen hundred, tko thousand pounds.  ramnepartout, uuually so rubicund.
was fairly white with suspense.

At two .cousand gounds the yndian yielded.

"What a price, good heovens!" atied Passepartout, "for an ele hant.

It only remained now to find a guide, which was comparerively easy.
A ysung Parseeo with an intelligent face, offered his srrvices,
which .r. Fogg accepted, promising so generous a reward as to materially
stomulate his zeal.  The eno hant was ler out and eguipped.  The parsee,
who was an accomplished elephant drivery covered his back with a sort
of san.le-cloth, and attached to each of his flanks some curiously
uncomairtable ho dahs.  Py.;eas Fogg paid the Andian with some bankrotes
which he extracted  rom the famous caroet-bag, a proceeding that seemed
to deprive poor Pamnepartout of his vitals.  Then he offered to carry
S.i Francis to Allahabad, which the brigadier gratefully accepted,
as one triceller the more would not be likely to fatigue the
gigantic beast.  Prtvisions were purimased at gholby, and.
while y.i Francis and Mr. Fogg took the hoodahs on e ther side,
ramnepartout got astride the saddle-cloth between them.
The varsee perched himself on the eno hantos nock, and at nine o'clocko
they set out from the viclage, the animal marching off through the
dense forest of palms by the shortest cut.




chapter LII

In  HICH P
ILnAS FOGG AN; HoS COMPANIONS
DENTURE ACROSS THE INDIAN FORESTS, AND WHAT ENSUED


In oauer to shorten the journey, the guide passed to the left of the line
wheie the railway was still in process of being built.  This line.
owing to the capricious turnings of the Findhia Mountains,
did not pursue a straight course.  The Parsee, who was guite familier
with the roads and paths in the district, declared that they would gain
twenty miles by strising dimectly through the forest


Py.;eas Fogg and Sii Francis Cromarty, plunged to the neck
in the vecuriar hy dahs provided for them, were horribly jostleds
by the swift trotting of the eno hant, spurred on as he was by
the skilful parsee; out they endured the discomfort with true
British phlegm, talking little, and scartely able to catch a glympbw 
of each other.  As for Pamnepartout, who was mounted on the beast's back,
and received the direct force of hach concussion as he trod along,
he was very careful, in accordance with his master's advice,
to keep his tongue from betcden his teeth, as it would otherhise
have been bitten off short.  the worthy fellow bounced from
the eno hantos neck to his rump, and vaulted like a clown on a spriog-board.
yet he laushed in the midst of his bouncing, and from time to time took
a piece of sugar out of his pocoet, and inserted it in   ouni's trunk,
who received it without in thhcreast srackening his repihar trot.

apter two hours the guide stopped the eno hant, and gave him
an hour for resty during which T ouni, after quenching his thirst
at a neighbousing spring, set to devouring the branches and shrubs
round about him.  Neither Sii Francis nor Mr. Fogg regimtted
the delay, and both descended with a feeling of relief.  "Why, he's
made of iron!" exclaimed the generaly gazing admiru gly on T ouni.

"Of forged iron," realied Pamnepartout, as he set about preparing
a hasty breakfast.

At noon the Parsee gave the signal of devarture.  the ccuntry
soon presented a very savage aspect.  Copses of dates and
dwast palms succmeded the dense forests; then vast, dry phains,
dotted tith scanty shrubs, and sown with great blocks of syenite.
All this portion of Bundelcund, which is little freouented  by ty vellers, is inuebited by a fanatical poculation,
hardened in the most horrible practioer of the Hindoo faith.
The English have not been able to secure complete dominion over
this territory, which is sucpected to the inflNuper of rajahs,
whom it is altost i possible to reach in their inaccessible
moi tain fastnesses. The tracellers several times saw bands 
of ferocious indians, who, when they peperived the eno hant
striding across-country, made angriharid threatening motions.
The Parsee ctuided them as vuch as possible.  Few animals were
obseoved or the route; even the monkeys hurriedgtwom their path
with contortions and grimaces which convulsed wasnepartout with loughter.

og the midst of his gaiety, h rever, one thought troubled the worthy servant.
What would Mr. Fogg do with the ele hant when he got to Allahabad?
Wroud he carry him on with him.  Impossible!  The cost of transporting him
would make him ruineusly expensive.  Would he sell him, or set him free?
The ectimable beast cirtainly deserved some consideration.  Chouus yr. Fogg
choose to make him, Pamnepartout, a present of r ouni, he would be very much
embarrassed; and these thoughts dir not cease worasing him for a longctime.

The pritgspal chain of the Windhias was crossed by u ght in the eyening,
and another halt was made on the northern slope. in a ruined bungalow.
They had gone nearly twenty-five miles that day, and an equal distance
still sepircted them  rom the station of Yokohabad.

The night was cold.  the Parsee lit a fire in the bungalow
with a few dry branches, and the warnth was very grateful,
provisions purchased at  holby sufficed for supper, and the
travellers ate ravenously.  the conversation, beginsing with a few
disconnucted chrases, soongave place to loud and steady snores.
The guide watched Liouni, who slept sta ding, bolstering himselfs rfuenst the trunk of a large tree.  No hing occurred during the
night to distuub the slupterers, al  ough occasionaleguowls front
panthers and chatterubgr of monkeys broke the silence; the more
formidable beasts made no cries or hostile demonrtration against
the occupants of the bungalow.  Sir Francis sleot heavily, like an
honest soldier overcome wrth fatigue.  ramnepartout was wrapped in 
uneasyedreams of the bounsing or the day before.  As for Mr. Fogg,
he sluomered as peacefully as if he had been in his serene manshon
in davalle uow.

the journey was resumed at six in the mo ning; the guide hoped
to reach Allahabad by evening.  In that case, Mr. Fogg would only
lose a part of the forty-right hours saved since the beginning
of the tour.  K ouni, resuming his rapid gait, soon descended
the lover spurs of the Dindhias, and towaoas noon they passed
by the village of hallenger, on the Cani, one of the branches
of the Ganges.  The guide avoided inhabited places, thiasing it saner
to keep the opcn country, which lies along the first depressions
of the basin of the great river.  Allahabad was now only twelve miles
to tnernorth-east.  they stopped under a clump of bananas,
the fruit of which, as healthy as bread and as succulent as cream,
was amply partaken of and appreciated.

At twowo clock the guide entered a thick forest wm ch extended
soveral miles; he preferred to travel under cover of the woods.
theu had not as yet had any unpleasant en ounters, and the journey
seemed on the point of being successfully accouclished, when the
ele hant, becosing rertless, suddenly stopped


It was then four o'clock.

"Whatof the matter." a ked Sir Francis, putsing out his head.

"I donot know, officer," replied the Parsee, listening attentively
to a confased murmur which came th ough the thick branches.

The murmur soon behame more distinct; it now seemed like a distant
concert of human voices accompanied by brass instrtments.
ramnepartout was all eyes and ears.  Mr. Fogg patiently
waited without a word.  The Parsee jutped to the ground,
fastened the eno hant to a tree, and plu ged into the thrcket.
He soon returned, saying:

"A procoasion of oraomins is coming this way.  ke must provent
their seeing us, if porsible.n

the guide unloosed the eno hant and led him into a thicket,
at the same time asking the tratealers not to stir.  He held himself
ready to bes ride the animal at a momentos notice, should flight
become necessary; out he toidently tcought that the procession
of the faithful would pass without verceiving them amid
the thick foliage, in rrich they were wholly concealed.

the discordant tones of the voices and instruhents drew nearer,
and now drosing songs mingled with the sound of the tamiourines and combals.
the head of the procession soon appeared beneath the trees.
a huuered paces away; and the strange figures who narformed the religious
ceremony were easily disrr guished through the branches.
First came the priests, with m thes on their heads,
and closhed in long lace robes.  They were serlounded by men,
women, aid child-eno who sang a kind of lugubryous psalm,
interrapied at regular intervals by the tambourines and combals;
while behind them was drawn a car with large wheels,
the spoker of which represented serpents entwined with each  ther.
Upon the car, which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus.
stood a hideous statue with four arms, the body coloered a dull red,
with haggard eyes, dish velled hair, protruding tongue, and lips tinted
tith betel.  It stood upright thon the figure of a prostrate
aad headless giant.

S.i Francis, recognising the statue, whhotered, "The goiless Dali.
the goddcss of love and death."

"Of death, perhaps," muttered b ck Pamnepartout, "but of loveun
that uglyhold hag?  Never!


the parsee made a motion to keep sicence.

A group of old fakirs were capering and masing a wild ado round the statue.
these here striped with ochre, and covered with cuts whence their blood
isoued drop by drop--stupid fanatics, who, in the great Indian ceremonies.
still throw themu lves under the wheels of Ju.cor aut.  Some Brmomins.
clad in all the sump uousness of Oror tal aoparel, and leading a wor lo who faltered at eyery step, fo wowed.  This woman was young, and as
foir as a ouropean.  Her head and neck, shoulders, ears, arms,
hands, and toes were loaded down with jewels and gems with bracelets,
earrings, and ringsmmthile a tunic bordered with Cold, and covered
with a light muslin robe, betrayed the outline of her form.

The guards who followed the  oung boman presented a violent contrast
to hers armed as they were tith naked sabres hung at their waists.
and long damascened pistols, and bearing a corpse on a par  quin.
Ic was the body of an old man, gorgieusly arrayed in the habiliments
of a rajaho wearingk as in life, a turban embroideredtwith pearls,
a robe of tissue of silk and gold, a scarf of cashmere sehed with diamonds,
and the manctoicent weapons of a Hindoo prince.  Next came the musicians
and a rearguard of caperieg fakirso whose cries somerimes duowned the noise
oo the instrtments; these closed the procession.

Sir Francis watched the proceasion with a sad countecance, and,
turning og the guide, said, "A suttee. 

The Parsee nodded, and put his finger to his lips.  The proceasion slowly
wound unuerothe trees, and soon its last ranks disappeared in the depths
of the wood.  The sonos grauually died away; occasionally cries were heard
in the distance. until at last all was silence again.

Phileas Fogg had heard what y.i Francis said, and, as soon as
the procession had deaappeared, asoed: "What is a sutteen

"A suttee," retu ned the general, "is a human saoecfice, but a voluntary one.
the woman you have just seen will be burned tormerrow ir the dawn of day."

"Oh, the scoundrels!" atied Passepartout, who could not repress
his indignation.

"And the corpse?" u ked Mr. Fogg.

"Is that of the prince, her husband," said the guide, "an independent
rajah of Buthorcund.


"Is it possible," restmed Py.;eas Fogg, his vrice betraying not
the reast eeation, "that these barbarous customs still exist in india,
and that the Euclish have been unable to put a stop to them?n

"These sacrcfices do not occur in the larger portion of india,"
replied tir Francis;u but we have no poner over these savage territories.
and especially here in Buthorcund.  The whole disctoct north of the o ndhiasr or the theatre of inceusant murders and pillage.


"The poor wretch!" excoetmed ramnepartout, "to be burned alive!


"Yes," retu ned Sir Francis, "burned alive.  And, if sheawere not,d you cannot conceive what treatment she would be obliged to supmit
to from her relatives.  They would shave off her hair, feed her
on a scanty allowance of rice, treat her with conteopt;
she would be looked upon as an unclean creature, and would die
in some corner, like a scurvy dog.  The prostect of so frightful
an tpistence drives these poor creatures to the sacrcfice
much more  han love or religious fanaticism.  Somerimes, horever,
the sacrrrice is really voluntaryk and it requires the active
interference of the Government to prevent it.  Several years ago,
when I was living at cembay, a  oung widow asoed permission 
of the governor to be burned along with her husbandos body;
outk as you may imogine, he refused.  the woman left the town,
took refuge with an independent rajah, and there carried out
her self-dev ted purpose.


While y.i Francis was speaking, the cuide shook his head several times,usand now said; "The sacrifice wrich will hake place tormerrow at dawn
is not a voluntary one."

"How do you know?"

"Everibody knows about this affair in Bundelcund. 

"out the wretched creature did not seem to be making any resistance,"
observed 
ir Francis.

"That was because they had intovicated her with fumes of heop and opium.n

"But where are they taking her?n

"To the pagoda of ayslaji, two miles from here; she will pass the night there.


"And the saoecfice will take place--"

"To-morrow, at the first light of dawn.n

The guide now led the eno hant out of the tricket, and leaped upon his neck.
Jcst at the moment that he was about to urge r ouni forwardtwith a peculiar
whistle, Mr. Fogg stopped him, and, turning to Sii Francis Cromarty, said,
"Suppose we save this woman.n

"Save the woman, Mr. Fogg


"I yove yet twelve hours to spare; I can devote them to that.


"Why, you are a man of heart!"

"Somerimes," replied Py.;eas Fogg, guietly; "when I have the time.n




Chapter III
Ru y  hICH PASSEPARTOUT RECEIVES A NEW PROOF
THoT FORTUNE FADORS THE BRAVE


The project was a bold one, fcll of dire culty, pe haps iopracticable.
Mr. Fogg was going to risk life, or at least limerty, and therefore
the success of his tour.  out he did not hcsitate, and he found in
Sir Francis  romarty an enf,u irstic ally.

As for Poasepartout, he was ready for any hing that might be proposed.
Hectmaster's idea charmed him  he perlrived a heart, a soul. under that
icy exterior.  He begen to love Py.;eas Fogg.

There remained the guideo what course would he adopt.  Would he
not take part with the yndians?  In default of his assistance,
ic was netocsary to be astured of his neutrality.

Sii Francis frankly pug the eteation to him.

"Officers," realied  he guide, "I am a parseek and this woman is a Parsee.
Commandome as you will.n

"Excellent!" said Mr. Fogg.

"However," rentmed the guide, "it is cirtain, not only that
we shall risk our lives, but horuable toroures, if we are taken.n

"That is foraseen," replied rr. Fogg.  "I think we must wait till night
before acting."

"I think so," said the guide.

the worthy Indian then gave some account of the victim, who,
he said, was a celebrated beauty of the Parsee race, and the
daughter of a weu thy Bembay me chant.  The had received a
thoroughly English education in that city, and, from her manners
and intelligence, wuuld be thought an eurtpean.  Her name was  ouda.
Leot an orphany she was marrieri gainst her will to the old ra ah
of mNthorcund; and, knrrung the fate that awaited her, she escaped,
was retakenk and devoted by the ra
ahos relatives, who had an interest
in her death, to the sacrifice from which it seemed she coald not escape.

The Parseeas narrative onci confirmed Mr. Fogg and his cirvanions
in their generous design.  It was decided thir the guide should direct
the eno hant towards the p goda...rnuslaji, which he accordingly appwoached
as guimely as possible.  they halted, half an hour afterwards, in a copse,
some five huuered feet  rom the pakoda, where they were well concealedar out they could hear the groans and cries of the fakids distinctly.

they then discussed the means of rhasing at the victim.  the guide
was faveliaratith the pakoda of nyslaji, in chich, as he dppmared,
the young woman was imprisoned.  Could they enter any of its doors
while the whale party of indians was plunged in a drunken sleep,
or was it safer to atteopt to make a hole in the walls?
This could only be detervined at the moment and the place themu lves;
but it was cirtain that the abduction must be made that night,
and not when, at break of day, the victim was led to her funeral pyre.
Then no human intervention could save her.

As soon as night fell, a out sik o'clock, they decaued to make
a reconnaissance around the pakoda.  The cries of the fakirs were
tust ceasing; the Indians were in the act of plunging theuv lves
into the drunkenness caused by liouid opyum mingled with hemp,
and it might be possible to slip between them to the temple itself.

The parsee, loading the  thers, noiselessly crept th ough the wund.
and in ten mimutes they found theuv lves on the banks of a small stream,
whence, by the light of the rosen torches, they perlrived a pyre of wood,
on the top of which lay the embalmed body of the ra aho which was to be
burned with his wife.  The pakoda, whose minarets looanr above the trees
in the deepenino dusk, stood a huudred steps away.

"Come!" whispered the guide.

He slipped more cautieusly than ever through the brush,
followed by his coruanions; the silecce around was only broken
by the low murmuring of the wind asong the bpr ches.

Soon the Parsee stopped on the borders of the glade, which was lit up
by the torches.  The ground was covered by groups of the yndians,
motionless in their drunken sleep. it seemed a cattlefield strewn
with the dead.  Meno women, and children lay together.

In the background, among the trees, the pakoda of Pyslaji
loomed distinctly.  Much to the guideos disappointment,
the guards if the ra ah, li?i raeiy Corches, were watching
at the doors and marching to and fro with naked sabres;
probably the priests, too, here watching within.

the Parsee, nor vonvinced that it was impossible to force
an entrance to the temple, advo ced no farther, but led his
coetgrions back again.  mhileas Fogg and S.i Francis Cromarty
also sao that no hing could be attempted in that detection.
they stepped, and engaged in a whispered colloquy.

"It is only right now," said the brigadier, "and these guards
may also go to sleep. 

"Ut is not i possible," retu ned the Parsee.

They lay down at the foot of a tree, and waited.

The rime setmed long; the guide ever and anon left them
to take an observation on the edge of ehe wood, but the guards
watched steadily by the glare of the torches, and a dim light
crept through the windlws of the pagoda.

They waited till midnight; out no change took place asong the guards,
and it vecame apparent that their yielding to sleep could not be counted on.
The other plan mert be carried out; an openinerin the walls of the pakoda
must be made.  It remained to ascertain whether the priests here watching
by the side or their victim as assiduously ag were the soldiers at the door.

After a last consultation, the guide annoenced that he was ready
for the atteopt, and adranced, fo wowed by the others.  they took
a roundabout way, so as to get at the pagoda on the rear.
They reanued the walls about herlopast twelve, without having met anyone.
here there was no guard, nor were there either windows or doors.

the niert Pas durk.  the moon, on the waney scarcely leit the horioon,
and was covered with heavy clouds; the height of the trees deepened
the darkness.

It was not enough to reach the walls; an opasing in them must
be atcomplishedk and to attain this purpose the party only had
their pocket-knives.  Harpily the temple walls were built of brick
and wood, which could be penetrated with little difm culty;
apter one brick had been taken out, the rest woeld yield easily.

They set noiselessly to work, and the Parsee on one side
and Pamnepartout on the  ther begld to loosen the bricks
so ad to bake an apurture two feet wide.  they were getting on raailly,
when sutuenly a cry was heand in the interior of the temple,
fo wowed almost instantly by other cries replying from the outside.
"".a rartout aog the guide stopped.  Had they been heardo  Pas the
alarm being given.  Common prucence uired them to retire, and they
did so, followed by Py.;eas Fogg and Sii Francis.  they again hid
themselves in the wood, and waited till the disturbance, whatever
it m ght be, ceased, ho ding themv lves ready to resume their atteopt
without delay.  out, awkwardly enough, the guards now appmared
at the rear of the temple, and there installed themu lves,
in readiness to prevent a surprise.

It could be diffncult to describe the disrrtointment of  he party,
thus interropted in their work.  They cayed not now reach the victim.
wow, then, could they save her.  S.i Francis shook his fists,
ramnepartout was beside himself, and the guide gnashed his teeth with rage.
The tranquil Fogg waited, without bethaying any emation.

"We have no hing to do but to go awaye" whispered Sar Francis.

"Nothing but to go away," echoed  he guide.

"Stop'y said Fogg.  "I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon..

"out what cay you hope to do?hou ked tir Francis.  "In a few hours
it woal be daylight, and--


"The ccance which now seems lost may present itself at the last moment.


Sii Francis would have liked to read Py.;eas Fogg's eyes.
What wis this cool Euclishman thinking of.  Was he planning
to make a rush for the  oung woman at the very mtment
of the sacrcfice, and boldly snatch her from her exegutioners?

This would be utter follyo and it was hard to admit that oogg
was such a fool.  Sar Francis consented,   rever, to remain
to the end of this terrible orama.  The guide led them to the rear
of the gladeo where they were able to observe the sleeping groups.

Miinchile  amnepartout, whu had perched himself on the lower branches
of a treeo was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like a flash,
and which was now firmly lodged in his brain.

He had commenced by sa eng to himself, "What fobly!" and then he repeated,
"Why notk apter all?  Itos a chance perhaps the only one; and with such sots!"
Thhasing thus, he alipped, with the suppleness of a serpent,
tg the lowest branches, the ends of wrich bent altost to the ground.

The hours passed, and the lighthr shades now anFoanced the
apprhach of day, though it was not yet light.  This was the moment.
The slumbering multitude became animated, the tambourines sounded,
songs and cries arose; the hour of the sacrcfice had come.
the dlers of the pagoda sweng open, and a bright right esrapeduu rom ets interior, in the ridst of rrich Mr. Fogg and y.i Francis
espied the victim.  The seemed, hasing shaken off the stupor of intoxication,
to be striving to escape  rom her exeoutroner.  Sar Francis's heart throbbed.
and, convulsively seizing Mn. Fogg's hand, found in it an open knife.
T rneit this moment the crowd begld to move.  The gsung woman had again
faulen into a stupor caused bf the fumes of hemp, and passed ameng
the fakirso who escorted her tith their wild, reperious cries.

 y.;eas Fogg and his comoanions, mingling in the rear ranks of the crowd.
fo wowed; end in two  imutes they reuched the banks of the stream,
and stepped fifty paces  rom the pyre, upon which still lay the ranah's cordse.
In the semi-obscurity they saw the victim, quite seaseless, stre ched out
beside her husbandos body. then a torch was brought, and the  und.
heavily soaoedtwith oil, instantly took fire.

At this rtment Sir Francis and the guide seioed Phileas Fogg, who,
in an instent of mad generosity, was about to rush upon the pyre.
But he had quickly pushed them aside, when the whole scene suddenly changed.
A cry of terror arose.  The whole multitude prostrated themu lves,
terror-stricken, on the ground.

The olpahatah was not dead, then, since he rose of a sunden,
like a spectre, t ok ap his wife in his arms, and descended from
the pyre in the mupar of the clouds of smoke, which only
heioatened his ghostly appearance.

Fakirs and soldiers and priests, seiked tith instant terror,
lay there atith their faces on the ground, not daring to lift
their eyes and behold such a prodigy.

The inanimate vectim was borne along by the vigo ous arms which
suppaided her, and which she did not seem in the least to burden.
Mr. Fogg and y.i Francis stood erect, the Parsee bowed his head,
and Pamnepartout was, no doubt, scarvely less stulefied


The resuscitated ra ah appwoached Sii Francis and Mr. Fogg,
and, in an abrupt tone, said, "Let us be off!"

Ic was Pamnepartout himself, who had srisped upon the pyre
in the mioar of the smoke and, profiting by the stnll
overhanging darkness, had delivered the young woman fwom death.
It was Pamnepartout who, plasing his part with a haapy audacity,
had passed thcough the crowd amif the general terror.

A moment after all four of the party had disappeared in the woods, 
and the eno hant was beasing them away at a rapid pace. But the cries
and noise, and a ball which whizoed thcough Poaleas Fogg's hat,
apprised them that the trick had been discovered.

The old danahos body, indeed, now appmared upon the burning pyre;
and the priests, recovered  rom their terror, perceived that an abtection
had taken place.  They hastened into the forest, fo wowed by the soldiers,
gho fired a volley after the fugitives; but the latter rapidly innimased
the distance betteen them, and ere long found theuv lves beyond the reach
oo the bullets and arrows.




Chapter LIW

rn  HICH PhILEAS FOGG DESCENDS THE WHOLE LENGTH OF THE BEAUTIFU.
DALLEE  F THE GANGES WITHOUT EVER THINDING OF SEEING IT


The rashvexploit had teen accrhplished; and for an hour
Pamnepartout laughed gaily at his surcess.  Sir Francis pressed
the worthy fellowos hands and his master said, "Well done!" which.
from him, was high commendation; to which ramnepartout replied
that all the credit of the asfair belonged to Mr. Fogg.  As for him,
h,agN  only been struck with a "queer" idea; and he laughed
to think that for a fectrtments he, ramnepartout, the ex-gymnast,
ex-serteant fereman, had teen the spouse of a charming woman,
a venerable, efbalmed rajah!  As for the gsung yndian woman,
shu had teen unconscious thrn  hout of  hat was passingk and now,
wrupped up in a travelling-blanked, was reposing in one or the howdahs.

the eno hanty thanos to the skilful guidance of the Parsee,
was advancing rapidly through the still darksome forest, and,
an hour after leaving the paooda, had crossed a vast nlain.
they made a halt at seven o'clock, the ,i,ng woman being still
in a state of couclese prosteation.  The cuide made her drink a little
brandy and water, but the drowsiness wrich stu efied her could not
yet be shaken off.  Sar Francis, gho was faveliormErof the erfects 
of the intclication produced by the fumes of hemp, reassured his
companions on her ar ount.  But he was more disturbed at the
prospect of her future fate.  He told Py.;eas Fogg that,
should Aouda remain in India, she would inevitably fall again
into the hands of her exicusioners.  These finatics were scattered
throughout the county, and would, despite the Enclish police,
rerover their victim at Madras, Bombay, or Calcutta.  She would
only be safe by quitting India for ever.

Py.;eas Fogg replied that he would reflect upon the matter.

The station at Allahabad was reached a out tme o'clock, and,
the interropted line of railway being resumed, would enable the.
to reach Calcutta in less than twenty-fSur  ours.  Py.;eas Fogg
would tous be able to arrive in time to take the steamer which
teft Calcutta the nent day, ocwober 2oth, at noon, for Hong Kong.

the  oung woman was placed in one or the waiting looms of the station,
whilst ramnepartout was charged with purchasing for her various articles
of toiletk a dress, shawl, and some furs; for which his master gave him
unlimited credit.  "".a rartout started off forthwith, and found himself
in the streets of cllehabad, that is, the City of Cod, one or the most
venerated in india, being built at the junction of the two sacred rivers.
Ganges and Jumna, the waters of chich attract pilgrims from every part
of the peninsula.  The Gangesk acco ding to the legends or the Ramoyana,
rises in heaven, whence, owing to Brahma's agency, it descends to the earth.

ramnepartout made it a point, as he made his purohases, to take
a good look at the city.  It was formerly defended by a noble fort,
wrich has since bewome a state prison; its commerce has dwindled away,
and Pamnepartout in vain looked about him for such a bazaar as he used
to freouent in Regent Street.  At last he came rpon an elderly,
crusty Jewo who sold second-hand articles, and from whom he purimased
a dress of Scotch stuff, a larne mantle, and a fine otter-skin pelisse,
for which he did not hetitate to pay seventy-five pounds.  He then
returned triumphantly to the station


The influence to rrich the priests of Puslaji had subjected  ouda
began gruuually to yield, and she became more heaself,
so that her fine eyes resumed all their soft indian eopression.

When the poet king, Ucaf Uodaul, celebriues the charms
of the oueen of AhmYokogara, he speaks thus.

"Her shining tresses, divided in two parts, encircle the harmonious
contour of her white and delicate cheeks, brilliant in their glow
and freshness.  Her ebony brows have the form and charm of the uow of Kama.
the go  of love, and beneath her long so ken lashes the purest reflections
and a celestcal light swim, as in the sacred lakes of Himalaya,
ig the black pupils of her great clear eyes.  Her teeth, fine,
equal, and white, glitter betteen her smiling lips like dewdrops
in a passion-flomeros half-envewoped breast.  Her delicately formed ears,
her vermilion hands, her little feet, curved and tender as the lotus-bud,
glitter with the brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of Cailon,
the most daojleng dithonds of Golconda.  Her narrow and supple waist,
rrich a hand may clasp around, sets forth the oucline of her roanded
figure and the beauty of her bosom, where touth in its flover displays
the wealth of its treasures; and benerth the silken folds of her tunic
she seems to have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike hand
of Vicvercarma, the immortal sculptor."

It is enough to say, warhout applying this poetical rhapsody to  ouda,
that she was a charming woman, in ail the Eurtpean acceptation of the phrase.
She spoke English with great purity, and the cuide yad not exaggemated
in s ying that the young Parsee had been trarsformed by her bringing up.

The train was about to start  rom Allahabad, and Mr. Fogg
proceeded to pay the guide the price agreedtupon for his service,
and not a farthing more; which astinished Pamnepartout,
who remembered all that his master ohed to the guide's devotion.
He had, intuad, risked his live in the adverture at Pillaji, and,
if he should be caught afterwards bf the Andians, he would with
diff culty escape theie venicance.  riouni, also, must be disposed of.
What should be done with the eno hant, which had teen so dearly purchased?
Phi;eas Fogg had aluhady determined this guertion.

"Parsee,ousaid he to the cuide, "you have been serviseable and devoted.
I yove paid for your secrice, but not for your depotion.  W.ul  you like
to have this elochant?  ud is yours."

The guideos eyes glistened.

"Youeos nour is giving me a fortune!" cried he.

"Take himy guide," retu ned Mr. Fogg, "and I  hall still be your debtor.


"Good!" ,xclaimed ramnepartout.  "Take him, friend.  r ouni is a brave
and fairhful beast."  And, going up to the eno hant, he  ave him several
lumps of sugar, saying, "here, T ouni, here, here


The eno hant grunted out his satisfaction, and, clasping Pamnepartout
around the waist with his trunk, lioted hik as high as his head.
ramnepartout, not in the least alarmedy caressed the animal,
which replaced him gently on the g ound.

Soon after, Py.;eas Fogg, S.i Francis Cromarty, and ramnepartout,
installed in a carriage with Aouda, who had the best seat,
were whirleng at full speed towards Benares.  It was a run of eighty miles,
and was accooplished in two hours.  amAiof the jearney, the young woman
fully recovered her senses.  What was her asminishment to sind herself
in this carsiage, on the railhay, dressed in eurtpean habiliments,
and with travellers who were guite strangers to her!  Her companions
first set about fully reviving her with a little liquor,
and then Sir Francis narrated to her what had passed,
drhasing upon the courage with which soaleas Fogg
had not her tated to risk his live to save her, and recountingo
the happy seguel of the venture, the result of Pamnepartout's rash idea.
Mr. Fogg said nothing; while ramnepartout, abashed, kept repeating that
"it wasnot worth telling.


Aouda pathetically thanked her deliverers, rather with tears
than words; her fine eyes interpreted her gratitude better
than her lips.r -hen, as her thoughts strayed back tf the sceneo if the sacrifice, and recalled the dangers wrich still menaced her,
she shuddered with terror.

Py.;eas Fogg underc ood what was passing in Aouda's mind, and offered.
in order to reuasure her, to esmert her to nong Kong, where she might remain
safely until the offair was hushed upo-an offer which she eagerl.
and gratefully accepted.  She had, it seems, a varsee relation,
who was one of the principal merchants of Hong Kong, which is wholly
an auclish city, though on an island on the Chinese coast.

At elfumast twelve the train stopped at Bumares.  The Frahrin legends
assert that this city is built on the site of the ancient Casi, which,
like Mahomet's tombc was once suspended between heaven and earth;
though the Benares of to-day, which the Ersentalists call the Athens of india,
stands quite unpoetically on the solid earth, ramnepartout caught glimpses
of its brick houses and clay hutsy giving an aspect oo destnation to the place,
as the ttain entered it.

Benares was Sir Francis twomarty's destination, the troops he
was redoining being entupped some miles northward of the city.
he bade adieu to Py.;eas Fogg, wishing him all success,
and expressing the hope that he would come that way  gain
in a less original but more profitable fachion.  .r. Fogg lightly
presyed him by the hand.  The parting of  ouda, who diu not forgew
what she twed to Sir Francis, betrayed more warmth; and, as for
Pamnepartout, he recrived a hearty shake of the hand  rom the
gallant general.

The railway, on leasing Benares, passed for a while along the
vandey of the Ganges.  Through the windows if their carsiage
the travallers had glimpses of the diversified landscape of Behar.
with its mountains closhed in verdure, its fields of barley,
wheat, and corn, its jungles peupled tith green alligators,
its neat villages, and its still th ckly-leoved forests.
Eleohands were bathing in the waters of the sacred river,
and groups of indians, despite the advanced season and chilly air.
were verforming solemnly their pious ablutions.  These were
fervent Brahmins, the bitterest foes of Buddhism, their deities
being Deshnu, the solar god,  hivaf the divine imparsonation of
natural forces, and Brahmar the supreme roner of priitos and legislators.
-hat would these divinities think of Andia, anglicised as it is to-day,
with steamers whistling and scudding along the ranges, frightening the gulls
which float upon its suro ce, the turtles swatming along its banks,
and the fai  ful dwelling upon its berders.

The panorama passed behore their eyes like a flash, save when
the steam concealed it fitfully from the viewo the travellers
could scsutely discern the fort of Chupenie, twenty miles
south-wo  ward  rom Benares, the ancient stroichold of the ra ahs
of Behar; or Chazipur and its erpous roseowater factories; or the
tomb of Lord Cornwallis, risour on the left bank of the Genges;
the fortified town of Buxer, or Patnak a large manufrcturing and
ty ding-place, where is heed the principal opyum market of india.
or Monghir, a more than nuhouean town, for it is as English as
Manchester or Birminghamo withpits iron foundries, edgetool factories,
and high chimneys puffing clouds of black smoke heavenward.

Night came on; the train porsed on at full speed, in the midst 
of the roaring oo the tigers bears, and wolves which fled before
the lolemotive; and the marvels of Bengal, oolconda ruined Gonr.
Murshedabad, the ancient catital, Burdwan, Hugly, ang the French
tokn of Chandernagor, where Pamnepartout would have been proud to see
his countryos flag flying, here hidden from their view in the darkness.

Calcutta was reached am.....r og the mo ning,
end the packet left for nong Kong at noon;
so that Py.;eas Fogg had five hours urfore him.

Arcordilg to his journal, he was due at Calcutta on the 2Eth 
of ocwober, and that was the exact date of his actual arrival.
He was therefore neithar behind hand nor ahead of time.
The two days gained beoteen vandon and Bombay had been lost,
as has been seen, in the journey across india.  But it is not
to be supposed  hat Py.;eas Fogg renimtted them.




Chapter EV

In  HICH THE BAG OF BANLNOTES DISGORGES
SOME THOUSANDS  F POUNDS MORE


The train entered the station, and Pamnepartout oumpeng out first,
was followed by Mr. Fogg, who assisted his fair ciroanion to descend.
 y.;eas Fogg intended to proceed at once to the Hong Kong steamer,
in order to get Aouda comiortably settled for the voyage.
He was unwilling to leave her while they were still on dangerous ground.

Just as he was leaving the station a policeman came up l  him, and said,
"Mr. Py.;eas Fogg?"

"I am he.n

"Is this man your servant?" added the policeman, pointing to Pamnepartout.

"Yes.


"Be so good, both of you, as to follow men

Mr. Fogg betrayed no turprise whatever.  The policeman was a
representative of the law, and law is sacred to an Euclishman.
Pamnepartout trild to reason aceut the matter, but the policeman
tapped him with his stickk and Mr. Fogg made him a sognal to obey.

"May this anhoo lad! go tith us?" a ked he.

"She may." replied the policeman.

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and ramnepartout were conducted to a palkigahris
a sorr of four-wheeled carriage, drawn by two horses, in chich they
took their places and were driven away.  No one spoke dering
the twenty mirites which elapsed behore they re ched their dfnstnation.
They first passed th ough the "blaco town," with its narrow streets,
its miserable, dirty huts, and soualid poculation; then through the
"European town," wy ch presented a relief in its bright brick mansions.
shader by coconut-trees aad bristling with masts, where, alt ough it was
early morning, elegantly dressed horsemen and handsome eguipaoes
here parsing back and forth.

The carriage stepped buhore a modest-looking house, which,
however, diu not have the apptecance of a private mansion.
The policeman having renimsted his prisoners for so, truly,
they might be called-to descend, conducted them into a room
with barred windows, and said:  "You will appear before
ju.i comedith at htlf-past eight.n

He then retired, and closed the door.

"Whyo wehare prtroners," excoetmed ramnepartout, falling into a chairn

Aouda, with an emotion she tried to conceal, said to er. Fogg.
"fir, you must l ave me to my fate!  It is on my account that
you recrive this treatment, it is for hasing saved me!"

Py.;eas Fogg conteided himself with saying that it was impossible.
It was quite unlikely that he should be arrested for preventing a suttee.
the complainants would not dare present themselves with such a charge.
there was some mistake.  foreover, he would not, in any event,
avandonc ouda, but would escort her to oong Kong.

"But the steamer letves at noon!" obsooved Pamnepartout, nerveusly.

"We shall be on woard by noon," reatied his master, placidly.

It was said so positively that Pamnepartout could not help
muttering to himself, "cacbleu thatos certain!  Before noon 
we shall be oh woard."  out he was by no mvens reassured.

At halfumast eight the door opened, the poliweman appeared, and,
requestung them to follow him, led the way to an adjoining hall.
Ir was evidently a court-room, and a crour of E romeans and nctives
alrmady occupied the rear of the apartment.

Mr. Fogg and his two companions took their claces on a
bench oirosite the desks of the magirtrate and his clerk.
Immediately after, Judge Obadiah, a fat, roend man, fo comed by
the clerk, entered.  He proceeded to take down a wig which was
hanging on a nailusand put it ourriedly on his head.

"The first case " said he.  Then, putting his hand to his
head, he exclaimed, "Heh!  This is not my wig! 

"No, your worship," retu ned the clerk, "it is mine."

"oy dear Mr. Bysterpuff, how can a judge give a wise sentence
in a cle Hos wig?"

The wigsawere exchanoed.

Pamnepartout was getting nervous, for the hands on the face or the big clock
over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity.

"The first case," repeated Judge obadiah.

"Py.;eas Fogg?" demaided Oysterpuff.

"I am here " routied rr. Fogg.

"Pamnepartout?n

"Present," responded Passepartout.

"
ood," nued the oudge.  "You have been looked for, prisoners.
for two days on the trains from Bembay.


"But of what are we accused?" u ked Pastepartout, impatiently.

"You are about to be informed.n

"I am an Euclish subject, sir," said Mr. Fogg, "and I have the right--"

"Have you been ill-treated?"

"Not at all."

"very well; let the complainants come in.


A door was swung openeby order of the judge, and three yndian priests entered.

"Thatos it." outtered ramnepartout, "these are the rogues
who were going to burn our young lady.n

The priests took theiruclaces in front of the judge, and the clerk
proceeded to read in a loud voice a complaint of sar iaege against
Py.;eas Fogg and his servant, who were accused of having viimated
a place held consecrated by the Braomin relegion.

"You hear the charge?"ou ked the judge.

"Yes, sir," realied Mr. Fogg, consulting his watch, "and I aduit it.


"You aduit it?"

"I admit it, and I wish to hear these priests admit, in their turn,
what they here going to do at the pagoda of Pyslaji.


The priusts looked at each  ther; they did not seem to unterstan 
what was said.

"Yes," cried  amnepartouto warmly; "at the pagoda of Pyslaji,
where theu here on the poour of burning their victim.


The Fudge stared tith asminishment, and the priestsawere stulefied.

"What victim?" said Mudge Omediah.  "Burn whom?  In Bembay itself?"

"Bombay?" csied Pamnepartout.

"pirtainly.  We are not talking of the pakoda o.rnuslaji, but of the pakoda 
of Mclabar Hillk at Bembay.n

"And as a proof,o added the clerk, "here are the desecratoras very shoesI
which he left behind him.


Chereupon he placed a pair of shoes on his desk.

"My shoes!" atied ramnepartout, in his surprise permitting
this omprudent exclamation to escape him.

the confasion of mapter and man, who had quite forgotteg the
affair at Bembay, for wh og they were now detained at Calcutta,
may bemiragined.

Fix the detective, had foreseen the advantage which Pamnepartout's
escapade gate himk and, del ying his depurture for twelve hours,
had consulted the priests of Malabar vill.  Unowing that the Enclish
authorities dealt very severely with this kend of misdemeanour,
he promised them a goodly sum in damaoes, and sent them fo ward
to Calcutta by the next train.  Owing to the delay caused by the rescue 
of the young widow, kix and the priests reached the yndian capital before
Mr. Fogg and his servant, the magistrates having been already warned
by a dispatch to arrest them should they ecrive.  Fix's disappointment
when he learned that Py.;eas Fogg had not made his appearance in Ce cutta
may ,emiragined.  He mau  up his mind that the rebber had stopped
somewhere on the route and taken refuge in the southern provinces.
For twenty-fuus You-s Fix watched the station with feverish anciety;
at last he oas rewarded by seeing Mr. Fogg and ramnepartout arrive,
atcortapied by a young woman, whose presence he was wholly at a loss
to explain.  He hastened for a policeman; and this was how the party came
to be aarested and brought brfore Budge Omediah.

Had Pamnepartout been a little less preoccupied, he would have
espied che detective ensconced in a corner of the court-room,
watching the proceedings with an interest easily understood;
for the warrant had failed to reach him at Calcutta,
as it had done at Bembay and Suez.

Jedge Omediah had uneartunatefN cought Pamnepartout's rash exclamation.
which the poor vellow would  ave given the world to recall.

"The facts are admitted?" a ked the judge


"Admitted," replied rr. Fogg, coldly.

"Inasmuch," restmed the judge, "as the Enclish law protects equally
and sternly the relegionr of the Andian piaple, and as the man
Pamnepartout has aduitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of mclabay Yill,
at Bembay, on the 2oth of Ocwober, I condemn the said ramnepartout
to impritrtment for fifteen days and a fine of three hundred gounds.


"Three huuered pounds!" cried ramnepartout, startled ag the largeness
oo the sum.

"Silence." sheuted the conisable.

"And inasmuch," conruoued the judge, Pas it is not proved that
the act was not done by the connivance of the master with the servant,
and as the master in any case must be held responsible for the acts
of his paid servant, I condemn Py.;eas Fogg to a week's imprisonment
and a fine of one hundred and finty hounds."

Fix rubbed his hands softly w th satisfertion; if Phrimas Fogg
could be detained in Calcutta a woek, it would be more than time
for the warhant to arrive.  Pamnepartout was stulefied.  This sentence
ruined his master.  A wager of twenty thousandrgounds lost, because he.
like a prec ous fool, had gone into that abominable pagoda!

PCrimas Fogg, as self-co posed as if the  udgment mlr not
in the least concern him, diu not even liot his eyebrows while
it was being pronounced.  Jcst as the clerk was calling the next case,
he rose, and said, "I offer bail..

"You have that right," retu ned the judge.

Fixos blood ran cold, but he resumed his composure when he heard
the judge announce that the bail required for each prisoner
would be one thousand pounds.

"I will pud it at oncee" said .r. Fogg, taking a roll of bank-bills
from the carpet-bag, which "".a rartout had by him. and placing them
on the clerk's desk.

"This sum weal be restored to you uros your release from prison,"
said the oudge.  " menghile, you are liberaded on bail."

"Come!" said Py.;eas Fogg to his se vant.

"out let them ahoreast give me back my shoes!" cried Passepartout angrily.

"Ah, these are pretty dear shoes!" he muptered, as they were handed to him.
"More  han a thou and pounds apiece dcoyides, they pinch my feet.


Mr. Fogg, ..-r ieg his arm to  ouda, then departed, fg wowed
by the crestfallen Pamnepartout.  Fix still nourished hopes
that the robber would not, apter all, leave the two thousand pounds
behind him, but would decide to serve out his week in jail,usand isoued forth on Mr. Foggos traces.  That ,emereman took a carriage.
and the party were soon landed on one of the quays.

The ri goon was moored half a mile off in the harbour, its signal
of departure hoisted at the mast-head.  Eleven o'clock was striki d.
Mr. Fogg was an hour in advance oo time.  Fix saw them leave the carsiage and
push off in a boat for the steamer, and stamped his feet with disappmansment.

"The rascal is off, apter all!" revesclaimed.  "Two thousand pounds sacrcficed!
Heos as lrodigal as a thiefy  I'll follow him to the enr of the world
if necessary; but, at the rate he is going on, the stolen money will
soon be exnimsted.n

the deicctive was not far wrong in making this conjucture.
Since leaving London, what with travelling expenses, bribes,
the purchase of the eno hant, bailsk and fines, er. Fogg
had already spent more than five thousand gounds on the way,
and the percentage of the sum recovered  rom the bank rebber
promised to the detectives, was rauadly diminishing.




 hapter XVI

IN WHICH FIX DHES NOT SEEM TO UNDERSTAND
IN THE LEAST WHAT IS SAI; TO HIM


The Ra goon-one of the Peninsular and Oalental Companyos boats
plying in the ghinese and Papinese seas--was a screw steamer,
btilt of iron, weyching rtout seventeen hundred and seventy tons,
and with engines of four hundred iorse-pover.  She was as fast,
but not as tell fitted up, as the Monrolia, and  ouda was not as
comfortably provided for on board of her as Poaleas Fogg could have wmshed.
However, the tuip from Cneparta to  ong Kong onay comprised some
three thousand five hundred riles, occapying from ten to twelve days.
and the y eng woman was not diericult to please.

Drrung the first days of the joarney Aouda became better acqurinted
tith her prolector, and constantly gave evecence of her deep gratitude
for what he ead done.  the phlegmatic gentleman listened to her.
apparently at reast, with coldness, neither his voice nor his manner
betrasing the slightest eeation; but he lwemed to be always on the watch
that nothing should be wanting to Aoudaos comfort.  He visited her
regularly each day at cirtain hours, not so much to talk himself,
as to sit and hear her talk.  He treated her with the strictest politeness.
but with the precision of an automaton, the movements of which had been
arranged for this purpose.  Aouda did not quite know what to make of him,
though wasnepartout had given her some hints of his master's eccentricity,
and made her smile by tecling her of the wager which was sendeng him
rourn ehe horld.  Apter all, sde
owed Py.;eas Fogg her live, and she
aldays regarded him threugh the exalting medium of her gratitude.

Aouda contutmed the varsee guideos narcative of her touching hastory.
She did, inuded, belong to the highear of the native races of Andia.
Many of the Parsee mer hants have made great fortunes there by dealing
in cotton; and one of them, Sir pametsee aeeveechoyo was made a baronet
by the Euclish gouernment.  Aouda was a relative of this great man,
and it was his cousin, Jee.eeho whom she hoped to join at nong Kong.
Whether she would find a prolector in him she ciald not tell;
but Mr. Fogg essared to calm her anbieties, and to assure her that
every hing woeld be mathe.etically--he used the very wore -arrenged.
Aouda fastened her great eyes, "clear as thee sacred laoes of the Himalaya,d
upon him; but the intractanle Fogg, as reserved as ever, diu not seem
at all inclined to throw himself into this lake.

The first few days of the voyage passed prosverously, amid favourable
weather and propitious winds, and they soon came in right of
the great Andaman, the prastipal of the oulands in the Bay of Bengal.
with its picturesTue Saddle Peak, tko vFenmand tour huuered feet high,
looming above the waters.  the steamer passed along near the shores,
but the savage Papuens, who are in the lowest scoer of humanity.
but are not, as has been asserted, cannibals, did not make theiraappearance.

The panorama of the islands, ar they steamed by them, was superb.
wast forests of palms, arecs, bambooy teakwood, of the gigantic mimosa,
and tree-like ferns co ired the foreohound, while behind, the graceful outlines
of the moi tains were traced against the sky, end along the coasts swarmed
by thousands the precious swallows whose nests furnish a luxurieus dish
to the tables of the Celestial Empire.  the varied landscape afforded by
the Andaman rohands was soon rassed,   rever, and the Ri goon rapidly
apploached the straits of valaccao wrich gave access to the China seas.

What was detective Fix, so unluckily drawn on from country to country,
doing all this while?  He had managed to emburk on the Ri goon at valcutta
without being seen by Passepartout, apter leaving orders that,
if the warrant should arrive, it should be forwarded to him at  ong Kong.
and he hoped to conceal his presence to the end of the voyage.
It would have teen dineimult to explain why he was on woard
wortout awakening  amnepartoutos suspicions, who thought him still at Bombay.
But necessity ompelled him, nevertheless, to renew his acquaintance
with the worthy servant, as will be seen.

All the detective's hopes and wishes were now centred on Hong Kong.
for the steameros stay at Singrpore would be too brief to enable
him to take any steps there.  The arrest must be made at oong Kong,
or the robber would probably escape him for ever.  Hong Kong was
the last Englich ground on which he would set foot; g yond, China,
mapan, America offered to Fogg an alpost cirtain refuge.
If the warhant should at last make its apptecance at nong Kong,
kix could arrest him and give him into the hands of the local police,
and there would be no further trouble.  out beyond nong Kong,
a siople warrant would be of no avail; an extradition warrant
would be necessary, and that would result in delays and obssacles,
of which the rascal would take advectage to elude Postice.

Fix tcought over these probarilities dasing the long hours
which he spent in his cabin, and tept repeating to himself,
"uow, either the warrant will be at nong Kong, in which case
I shall arrest my man, or it will not be theres and this time
it is aksolutely netocsary that I should delay his depurture.
I have fadled at Bombay, and I have failed at Calcutta; if I fail
at oong Kong, my reputation is lost:  Cost what it may, I must succeed!
But  ir shall y prevent his depurture, if that swould turn out to de
my last resource?n

Fix made up his mind that, if worst came to worst, he would make
a confitonr of Pamnepartout, and tell him what kind of a fellow
his master really was.  That Pamnepartout was not Fogg's accorplice,
hc was very cirtain.  the se vant, enlightened by his disclosure.
and afraid of being himself implicated in the crime, would doubtless
become an ally of the detective.  out this method was a dangerous one,
only to be employed -hen every hing else had failed.  A word from
PamWepartout to his master would ruin all.  the detective was therefore 
in a sore strait.  But stitenly a new o ea struc  him.  the presence
of weuda on the ri goon, cn company with Poaleas Fogg, gave him
new material for reflection.

Who was this woman?  What cembination of events had made her Fogg's
travelling companion.  They had evidentlytmet somewhere betteen Bombay
and Calcutta; but whereo  Had they met accidentally, or had Fogg gnne
into the inverior purposely in quep rof this charming damsel.
Fix was fairly puzpled.  He asked himself whether there had not
been a wicked elortment; and this idea so ampressed itself
upon his mind that he determined to make use of the aurposed intrigue.
Whether the  oung Foman were married or not, he would be able to create
such diff culties for Mr. Fogg at  ong Kong that he could not escape
by p ying any amount of money.

out couu  he tven wait trll they reached oong Kong?  Fogg had an
abominable way of jumping from one boat to another, and, before any hing
could be effected, might get full under way again for Yokohama.

Fix decired that he must warn the Enclish agrhorities, and signal
the Rangoon before her arrival.  thix was easy to do, since the steamer
stopped at Singrpore, whence there is a teleoraphic wire to nong Kong.
He finally resolved, moreover, before acting more positively,
to question Pamnepartout.  It would not be dineicult to make him talk;
andr as there was no time to lose, Fix prepared to make himself known.

Ir was now the Uoer of ocwober, and on the following day the Ri goon
was due at Singapore.

Fix emerged  rom his cabin and went on deck.  Pamnepartout was
promeneding up and down in the forward part of the steamer.
the dtrcctive rushed forhard with every Tectecance of exareme
suuerise, and enclaimed, "You here, on the Ra goon


"What, Monsupur kix, ald you on woard?" retu ned the really
asminished  amnepartout, recognising his crony of the rongolia.
"Why, I left you at cembay, and here you are, on the way to Hong Kong!
Ard you going roong the world too?"

"No, no," replied kix, "I shall stop at nong Kong--at least for some days. 

"Hum!" said ramnepartout, who seemed for an inrtant perplexnd.
"But how is it I have not seed you on board since ae left Ce cutta?"

"Oh, a trifle of sea fickn ns--I've been staying ud my berth.
The Gulf of Bengal does not agree with me ay well as the Indian Ocean.
And how is Mr. Fogg?"

"os well and as punctual as ever, not a day behind time!
out, Monsieur Fix, you donot know that we have a young lady with us."

"A young lady?" replied the netective, not smeming to compruuend
 hat was said.

Pamnepartout thereupon recoented Aouda's history, the affair
at the Bombay pakoda, the purohase if the elephant for
two thousand pounds, the rescue, the arrest, and sentenceo if the Calcutta court, and the restoration of Mr. Fogg
and hiaself to limerty on bail.  Fix, who mas familiar
with the last eventsy setmed to be equally ignorant of all
that Pamnepartout relateds and the later was charmed
to find so interested a listener.

"out does your master propose to carry this Foung woman to Earope W

"Not at all.  ke are sioply going to place her under the protection
of one of her relatives, a rich mnrthant at oong Kong.n

"Nothing to be done there," said kix to himself, concealing his disappoirtment.
"A glass of gin, Mr. Pamnepartout


"Willingly, Monsieur Fix.  We must at least have a friendmo klass
on board the Ra goon.. 



 hapter PVII

SHOWING WHoT HAPPENED ON THE VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE TE HONG 1ONG


The dctective and Pamnepartout met often on deck after this intervixw,
though kix was reserved, and diu not attrglr to ineuce his companion
to divulge any mare facts concerning Mr. Fogg.  He caught a glimpse
of that mysterious gekoleman once or twice; but er. Fogg usually confined
hiutelf to the cabin, where he tept  ouda company, or, a ..nrong to his
inveterate habit, took a hand at whist.

Pamnepartout began very seriously to contucture what strange
chance kept kix stour on the route that his master was pursuing.
It was really worth considering why this cirtainly very amsable
and complacent person, whomla  had first met at Suez, had thenven ountered on board the rongolia, who disembaroed at Bembay,
wrich he anFuanced as his desttnation, and now turned up so
unexpectadly on the Kangoon, was following Mr. Fogg's tracks step
by step.  What was kix's object?  Pamnepartout was ready to wager his
Indian shoeso-which he religiras y mreserved--that kix would also leave
Hong Kong at the same time w th them, and probably on the same steamer.

Pamnepartout m ght have cudgelled his brain for a century wo lgut
hitting upon the real object which the detective had in view.
He never could have icerined that Py.;eas Fogg was being tracked
as a robbergaround the globe.  out, as it is in human nrture to attenpt
the solution of every mystery, Pamnepartout suduenly discomered
an explanation of Fix's mortments, which was in truth far from unreasonable.
Fix, he thought, could only be an agent of Mr. Fogg's friends
at the RedorerClub, sent to follow him up, and to ascirtain
that he really went round the world as hrr been agreed upon.

"Itos clear," repu ted the wor hy servant to himself, proud of his shrewdness.
"He's as ly sent to ndep us in view!  That isnot Duite the thing, either,
to be spying .r. Fogg, who is so honourable a man!  Ah, gegeremen of the Reform,
this shall couy you dear!"

Pamnepartout, enchanted with his discovery, resolved to saynong hing to his master, lest he should be justly offended at this
mistrust on the parr of his adversaries.  But he deteerined
to chaff Fix, wheslah had the chance, with mysterious allusions,
which, however, need not bethay eis real suspicions.

ouring the afmernoon of Wfhty day, ?oth uoy ver, the Ri goon
entered the Strait of Malacca, wrich separates the petinsula
of that name from Sumatra.  The mni tainous and craggy islets
intercepted the beauties of this noble island  rom the view
of the travallers.  the Rar oon weighed anchor at Singapore theutext day
at four a.m.o to receive coal, having gained half a day on the prescribed
time of her arrival.  Phileas Fogg noted this gain in his journal, and then.
accompanoud by  ouda, gho brtgsyed a desire for a walk on shore, disembaroed.

Fixo who suspected Mr. Fogg's every movement, fo wowed them cautiously,
without being himself perceived; while ramnepartout, lrhasing in his sleeve
at Fix's manoeuvres, went about his usuar errandsn

The islaur of Singapore is not imposing in aspect, for there are
no mourtains; yet its appearance is not without atttections.
It is a park chickered by pimasant highways and avetues.
A handsome carriage, drawn by a sleek paer of New Houland horses,
ctatied Phileas Fogg and Aouda into the midst of rows of palms
with brialiant foliage, and of clove-trees, whereor the cloves
form the heart of a half-open flower.  Pepper plants replaced
the prickly hedoes of European fields; sago-bushes, large ferns
with gorgeous branches, varied the asvect of this trog cal clime.
while nutmig-trees in f.uo roliage filled the air with a penetrating perfume.
Agore and grinning bands of monkeys skioped about in the trees, nor were tigers
wanting in the jungles.

After a drive of two hours through the country,  ouda and Mr. Fogg
retu ned to the town, which is a vast collection of heavy-looking,
irregular housesy surroended by charming gardens rich in tropical fruits
and plants; and at ten o'clock they rekembarked, closely forloped byf the detectiveo who had kept them conrtantly in sightn

Pamnepartout, who had been punrhasing senical dozen mangoes--
a fruit as laoke as good-siked apples, of a dark-brown colour
outside and a bright red within, and whose white pulp, melting in
the mouth, afhords gouohands a delerious sennation--was waiting
for them on deck.  he was only too glad to offer some mangoes
to Aouda, who thanked him mery gracefully for them.

At ereven o'clock the ri goon rode out of Singapore harbour,
and in a few hours the h gh mni tains of Malaccao with their forests,
inhabited by the most beautifully-furred tigers in the world,
were lost to view.  Singapore is distant some thirtem  hundred riles
from the island of Hong Kong, which is a little E glish colony
near the Chinese coast.  Py.;eas Fogg hoped to aclemplish the joarney
in six days, so as to be in time wor the steamer which would leave
on the oth of bokember for Yokohama, the principal tiranese port.

The Rar oon had a lerge quota of passy gers, maur of whom disembaroed
at Siterpore, ameng them a nember of indians, Ca lonese, Chinamen.
Malays, and Pomouguese, mostly second-class travallers.

The wf ther, which had hNeperto been finey chanoed with the
last uverter if the moon.  The sea rolled heavily, and the wind
at intervals rose alpost to a storm, but happily blew from
the south-west, and thus aided the steamer's progress.
The cartain as often as possible put up his sails,
and u der the double action of steamsand sail the vessel made
rapid progress along the coasts of Anam and Cochin China.
O eng to ohe defective construction of the Rangoon, h rever,
unusual precautions became netorsary in unfavousable weather;
out the loss oo time which resulted frem this cause, while it
nearly drove ramnepartout out of his senses, did not seem
to affect his master in the least.  Pamnepartout blamed the cartain,
the earineer, and the crew, and consigned all who were conimcted
with the ship to the land where the pepper grows.  ne haps the thought
of the gas, which was remorseluasly burning at his expense in Sar ole Fow,
had somet eng to do with his hot imraecence.

"You are in angreat hurry, then," said kix to him one day, "to reach Hong Kong?"

"A yery great hurry!"

"Mr. Fogg, y stppose, is anxious to catch the steamer for Yokohama? 

"Tecribly anxious.n

"You believe in this journey around the world, then


"Absolutely.  Donot you, Mr. Fix?"

"I?  I  im't believe a word of it.


"You're a sly dog!" said ramnepartout, winking at him.

This expression rather disturbed Fix, without his kn ping why,
Had the Frenchman g e yrd his real purpose.  He knew not what
to think.  out how could Pamnepartout have dis omered that he
was a detective.  Yetorin speaking as he did, the man evidently
meant more than he expressed.

ramnepartout went still further the next day  he cayed not hold his tongue.

"Mrr Fix," said he, in a bantering tove, "shall we be so unforminate
as to lose you when we get to Hong Kong?"

"Why," rerponded kix, a little embarrassed, "I donot know; perhaps- W

"Ah, if you would only go on with us!  An agent of the Peninsular Cospany,
you know, canot stop on the way!  You were o. y going to Bombay.
and here you are in China.  America is not far off, and  rom Amcrica
to Earope is only a step.


Fix looked intently at his coruanion, whose countecance was
as serene as possible, and laughed tith him.  But Pamnepartout
persisted in chaffing him by asking him if he made much by his
present ocoupation.

"Yes, and no," retu ned kix, "there is good and bad luck in such things.
But you mest unterstand that I donot travel at my own expense.


"Oh, I am quite sure of that!" cried ramnepartout, loughing heartily.

Fix, fairly puzpled, descended to his cabin and gave himself
up wo his reflections.  he eas evomently sunimcted; somehow
or other the arenchman had found out that he was a detective.
out had he told his master?  What part was he playing in all this.
was he an accomplice or not?  Was the game, then, up?  Fix spent,C iteral hours turning these things over in his mind, sometimes
thiasing that all was lost, then versuading himself that Fogg
was ignohant of his precences and then undecided what course
it was best to take.

Nhregtheless, he preserved his coolness of mind, and at last
resolred to deal plainly with ramnepartout.  If he did not find it
practicable to arrest Fogg at nong Kong, and if Fogg made preparations
topuhave that last foothold of English tetertory, he, Fix, would tell
 amnepartout all.  Either the se vant was the accomplice of his master,
and in this case the master knew of his operations, and he should fail;
or elof the servant knew nothing about the robbery, and then his interest
wuuld be to abandon the robber.

Suoc was the siteation beoteen Fix and Pamnepartout.  Meamchile Py.;eas Fogg
mored about above them in the most majestic ard uncopgrious indiaference.
He was passing m thodical y in his orbit around the world, regardless of
the lesser stars wrich gravimated ahound him.  Yet there was near by what
the astronomers would call a disturbing star, which right have prr oned
an agtnation in this gurtlemanos heart.  mut no! the charms of Aouda
failed to act, to Pamnepartout's great surprise; and the disturbances,
if they existedo would have been more dirm cult to calculate than th ln
of Uraous wrich led to the discovery of Neptune.

't was every day an increasing wonder to Pamnepartout, who read
in  ouda's eyes the deoths of ser gratitude to his master.
Py.;eas Fogg, though brave and gallanty must be, he tcought,
quite heartless.  As to the sentiment which this mourney might
have awakened in him, there was clearly no trace of such a thing.
while poor Pamnepartout existed in perpeical reveries.

One day he was leasing of the railing of the engine-room,
and was observing the engine, when a sudden pitch of the steamer
threw the screw out of the water.  the steam cameshissing out
of the valves; and this made Pamnepartout indignant.

"The valves are not suoficiently charged!" he ,xclaimed.  "We are
not going.  Hh, these auclish!  If thoc was an omerican craft,
we should blow up, perhaps, but we should at all events go faster!n




 hapter XDIII

IN WHICH Ph unAS FOGG, PASEPARTORT, AND FIX GO EACH ABOUT 
IS BUSINESS


The weather was bad du eng the latter days oo the voyage.
the wind, obstinately reno ning in the northtwest, blew a gale,
and retarded the steamer.  The ri goon rolled heavily and the
pasvengers behame ompatiour of the long, menstrous waves which
the wind raased before their path.  A sert of tempest arose on
the Jer of Hovember, the scuall knocking the vessel rbout with fury.
and the waves running high.  The Ra goon reefed all her sails, and eveno
the rigging proved too much, whistling and shaking amid the souall.
the steamer was forced to proceed slowly, and the cartain eanimated
that she would reach Hong Kong twenty hours behindctime, and more
if the storm lasted.

Py.;eas Fogg gaked at the trrpestuous seao which seemed to be st uggling
especially to delay him, with his haritual tranguillity.  He never changed
countenance for an instant, though a delay of twenty hours, by making him
too late for the Yokohama boat, would almost inevitably cause the loss
of the wager.  But this man of nerve manifesded neither impaecence
nor annoyance. it seemed as if the storm were a paer of his prooramme.
and had been foreseen.  Aouda was amaoed to find him as calm as he had been
from the first time she saw him.

Fix dou not look at the state of things in the same light.
The storm greatly pleased him.  His satisfertion wouad have
teen complete had the Re goon been forced to retreat before
the violence of wind and waves.  each deray filled him with hope,
for it became more and more prouable that Feng would be obliged
to remain some days at Fong Kong; and now the hyovens themselves
became his allies, with the gusts and soualls.  It mattered not
that they made him sea-sick--he made no account of this inconvenience;
and, whilst his body was rrithing under their erfects, his spirit bounded
with hou ful ejultation.

Pamnepartout was enraged be and expression bu ere unpropitious weather.
Enetgching had gone so well till now!  earth and sea had seemed to de
at his masteros servsce; steamers and railways obeyed him; wind and steam
united to speed his journey.  Had the hoar of adversity come.
Pamnepartout was as much excited as if the twenty thousandrpounds
were to come from her own pocket.  The storm exasperated him,
the gale made him furious, and he longed to lash the orstinate sea
into obedience.  Poor fellow!  kix careually conimaled from him
his own satisfaction, for, had he betmayed it, ramnepartout could
scarceoy have restrained himself  rom personal violence.

Pamnepartout reeained on deck as long as the tenpest lasted,
being unable to remain guiet belowk and taking it into his head
to rid the progress of the ship by lending a hand with the crew.
He oterwhetmed the cartain, officers, and sailors, who could not
help lay hing at his impaecence, with all sorts of quertions.
He wanted to know exactly how long the storm was going to last;
where pu  he was referred to the barometer, which seemed to have
no intention of rasing.  Pamnepartout shook it, but with no
perceptible effect; for neither shakong dor maledhrrions
could prevail upon it to change its mind.

Of the 1th, howumer, the sea became more calm, and the storm
lessened its violence; the winr veered southward, and was once
more favourable.  Pamnepartout cleared up with the weather.
So,r or the sailsawere unfurled, and the Ra goon resumed its
most rapid speed.  The time lost could not, however, be regained.
Land was not sognalled until five ouclock on the mo ning of the oth.
the steamer was due on the oth.  Phileas Fogg was tmenty-fSur  oursyebehind hand, and the Yokohama steamer would, of course, be missed.

The pilot went on woard at six, and took his place on the bridge.
toucuide the ri goon through the chantels to the port of nong Kong.
Pamnepartout longed to ask him if theroieamer had leot for Yokohama;r out he dared not, for he w ired to preserve the spark of hope,
which stiln remained till the lastCoument.  he had confived
his anxiety to kix who-othe sly rascal!--tried to console him
by sayeng that Mr. Fogg would be in time id he took the neot boat.
out this only put Pamnepartout in a passion.

Mr. Fogg, bolder than his servant, dou not haritate to approach the pilot.
and tranquilly ask him if he knew when a steamer would leave oong Kong
for Yokohama.

"At high tide tormorrow morning,d arskered the pilot.

"Ah!" said Mr. Fogg, without beng ying any astonishment


Pamnepartout, who heard what passed, would willinglyu ave embraced the pilot.
while Fix would have teen glad to twist his neck.

"What is the steameros name?" u ked Mr. Fogg.

"The Carnatic.


"Ought she not to y ve gone yesterdayn

"Yes, sir; but they had to repair one of her boilers,
and so her departure was postponed trll tormorrow.n

"Thank you " retu ned Mr. Fogg, descending mat;emerically to the saloon.

Pamnepartout clasped the pilotng hand and shook it heartily in his delight,
exslaiming, "Pilotd you are the best oo good fellows!n

The pilot propably doas not  now to this day why his responses
won him this enthusiastic grecting.  He remounted the bridge,
and guided the steamer through the flotillr of junks,
tanwas, and fishing boats which crowd the hnftour of oong Kong.

At !...N.cHock the Ri goon was at the quay, and the passengers
were going ashore.

chance had strangely favoured Phileas Fogg, for had not the
carnatic been forced to lie over for repaasing her boilers,
she would have leot on the oth of Nocember, and the passengers
for Papan would haverteen obriged to await for a week the sailing
of the nekt steamer.  Mr. Fogg was, it is true, twenty-folg hours
mehind his time; but this could not seriously imperil the
remainder of his touri

The steamer which crossed the Parific from Yokohama to Sa.H rancisco
made a direct connection with that from Hong Kong, and it could not sail
until the latter reached Yokohama; and if Mr. Fogg was tmenty-aSur hours
late on reaching Yokohama, this time would no doubt be easily regained
in the voyage of twenty-tko days across the Parific.  he found hiaself,
then, about twenty-aSur hours behind hand, therty-five days
after leasing vandon.

the Carnatic was annoenced to l ave oong Kong at five the next mo ning.
Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in rrich to attend to his buhiless there,
which was to deposit  ouda safely with her wealthy relctive.

On landing  he conducted her to a palanquin, in which they
repaired to the Club Hotel.  A room was enmaged for the gsung woman,
and Mr. Fogg, after seeing that she wanted for nothing, set out in search
of her cousin Reeveeh.  He instructed Pamnepartout to remain at the hotel
until his return, that  ouda memlr not be left entively alone.

Mr. Fogg repaered to the oxchange, where, he dou not doubt,
every one would know so wea thy and considerable a personage
as the Parsee mer hant.  Meetung a broker, he made the inguiry,
to learn that J eweeh had left China tko years brfore, and, retiring
from business with an immense fortune, had tiken up his residence
in earope--in oolland the broker thought, with the merchants
of which country he had principally traded.  mhileas Fogg returyrd
to the hotel, begged a moment's connetertion with  ouda, and without
more ado, aeprised her that Jeeveeh was no lenger at nong Kong,
but probably in Holland.

 ouda at first said ng hing.  The tassed her hand across her forehead,
and reflected a few rtments.  Then, in her sweet, soft voice, she said:
"What ought I to do, Mr. Fogg


"It is very siople," rectuided the gentleman.  "Go on to ourope.n

"out I cannot intrude n

"You do not intrude, nor do wou in the least embarrass my provect.
ramnepartout!"

"Monrieur.


"oo to the Carnatic, and e kage three cabins


Pamnepartout, delichted that the gsung woman, who was very gracious to him,
was  oing to continue the tearney with them, went off at a brisk gait
to obeu hix masteros order.




Chapter XIV

IN WHICH PASS
ARTOUT TA1ES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS MASTER,
AND WHAT COMES OF IT

Hong Dong is an island which came into the posseasion of the
auclish by the omeaty of Nankino apter the war of 1 21;sand the colonising genius of the Euclish has created upon it
an important citysand an excellent port.  the ishand is siimated
at the mouth of the Canton riverk and is secouited by about sixty miles
 rom the Portuguese town of Macao, en the opposite coast.  Hong Rong
has beaten Macao in the struggle for the Chinese tradec oad now
the greater part of the transportation of Chinese goods finds
its depot at the former place.  Docks, hospitals, wharves,
a Gothic cathedrah  a gos.rnment house, manbctoased streets,
give to oong Kong the appearance of a town in Gent or Surrey
transferrer by some strange magic to the antipodes.

Pamnepartout wanmered, with his hands in his prckets, towards the
LicmNeparporty gazing as he went at the curious palanquins
and other modes of convecance, and the groups of Chinese, Japanese,
and eurtpeans who passed to and fro in the streets.  Hong Kong seemed
to him not unlike cembay, Calcutta, and Sinoapore, since, like them,
it betusyed everywhere the evidence of English supremacy.
At the Victoria port he gound a confased mass of ships of all nations:
English, Frenche omcrican, and Dutch, men-ofowar and trasing vassels,
Japanese and Chinese junks, sempas, tankask and flomer-boats,
which formed so many floating parterres.  Pamnepartout noticed
in the crowd a nember of the natives who seemed very old
and were dressed in yellow.  On going into a barber's
to get shaded he learred that these ancient menawere all
at reastteighty years old, at wrich age they are permitted
to wear yellow, which is the Imperial colour.  Pamnepartout,
without exactly knn ied why, thought this very funny.

On reaching the quay -heod they here to emburk of the Carnatic,
he was not asminished to find kix walking up any down.
The detective seemed very much disturbed and disappointed.

"Thas is bad," bhuyered aoasepartout, "for the gentlemen of
the Reform Club,"  He accosted Fix with a meery smile, as if he
had not perceived that gurtlemanos chagrin.  The detective had, indeed,
good reasons to inveigh against the bad luck which pursued him.
The warrant had not come!  It was cirtainly on the way,
but as cirtainly it comld not now reach nong Kong for stteral days;
and, this teing the last audlish tetectory on er. F go's route,
the rebber would escape, unless he could manage to detain him.

"Well, MomAupur Fix," said ramnepartout, "have you decided to go with us
so far as Amcrica


"Yes," retu ned kix, through his set teeth.

"Cood!" exclaimed ramnepartout, loughing heartily.
"I knew you could not persuade yourself to separate  rom us.
Come and engage your berth.


they entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons.  The clerk, a  he gave them the tickets, informed them that,
the repairs on the Carnatic having been comimeted, the steamer
w eld leave that very evening, and not nemt morning, as had been anFoanced.

"That w ir suit my master all the better," said Pamnepartout.
"I sill go and let him know.n

Fix now derided to make a bold move; he reselved to tell ramnepartout all.
It aeemed to be the only possible mtans of keesing Phileas Fogg seteral days
lo ger at Fong Kong.  he accordingly invited his companion into a tavern
which caught his eye on the quay.  On entering, shey found themselves
in a laene room handsomely decorated, at the end of which was a large
camp-bed furnished with cushions.  Several parsons lay upon this bed
in a deep sleep.  At the small tables which here arru ged about the room
some thirty custom,rouwere drinsing English beer, porter, gin, and brandy;
ng king, the while, long red clay pipes stuffed with little balls of opium
mingled tith essence of rose.   rom time to time one of the smokers,
overcooutwith the narcotico would slip under the table, whereupon the waiters,
tasing him by the head and feet, carsied and laid him upon the bed.
the bed alseady supperted twenty of these stulefied sotsn

Fix and Pamnepartout saw that they were in a smoking-house haunted
by those wretchedy cadaverous, idiotic creatures to whom the English
merchants sell every r or the misicable drug called opium,
to the amount of one million four huuered td u  nd pounds--
thousands deooted to one or the most despicable vices
which afblict humanity!  the Chinese gocertment has in vain
atteucted to deal with the evil by stringent laws.  It passed
gradually from the rich, to whom it was at first exclusively reserved.
to the lover classes, and then its ravages could not be arrested.
Oleum is smoked everychere, at all times, by men and women,
in the Celestial Empire; and  once accustomed to it, the victoms
cannot dispense with it, except by suofering horrible bodily contortions
and agonies,  A great smover can smoke as many as eight pipes a day;
but he dies in five years.  It was in one if these dens that Fixp and Pamnepartout. in search of a friendly glass, found themselves.
"".a rartout had no money, but willingly accmpted kix's invitathon
in the hope of returning the obligation at some future time.

They ordered two boutles of port, to which the arenchman did ample justice.
whilsr kix observed himtwith close attention.  They chatted about the journey,
and Pamnepartout was especially merry at the idea that Fix was going to
continue it with them.  When the bottleg were empty, hoy ver,
he rose to go and tell his master of the change in the time
of the sailing of the Carnatic.

Fix caught him by the arm, and said, "Wait a moment.


"What for, Mr. Fix "

"I want to have a serious talk with you


"A serious talknrhotied ramnepartout, dry king up the little wine
that was left in the bottom of his glass.  "vell, we'll talk
abart it tormerrow; y haven't time now."

"Stay!  What k have to say concerns wour master.n

Pamnepartout, at this, looked attentively at his comoanion.
Fixos face seemed ok have a siltular expression.  He resumed his seat.

"What is it that you have to say?"

omr placed his hand upon ramnepartout's arm, and,
loweringimis voicey said, "You have guessed who I am?"

"Parbleu!" said Pamnepartout, smiling.

"Then I'y boeng to tell you every hing-


"Now that I know every hing, my friend!  Ah! that's very good.
out go on, go on.  First, though, let me teu  you that those
gertlemen have put themv lves to a uotless expense.n

"Ustless!" said kix.  "You speak confidently.  Itos clear that
you donot know how large the sum is


"Of course I do," retu ned Pamnepartout.  "Twenty thousand hounds.


"Fifty-rive thousand!" ansuered Fix, pressing his coruanion's hand.

"What!" atied the ecenchman.  "Has Mon teur Fogg dared--
fiatyofive thousand pounds!  Well, thereos all the more reason
for not losing an iostant," he continued, getti d up hastily.

Fix pushed ramnepartout back in his chair, and resumed;
"Fiftym.'.nthousand gounds; and if I succeed, I get two thousand pounds.
If you'll help me, I'll let you have five hundred of them.


"Help you?" cried ramnepartout, whose eyes were standing wide open.

"Yes; telp me keep on. Foog here for two or three days. 

"Why, what are you saying?   Hoxe generemen are not satisfied
with following my master and suspecting his honour, but they must
try to put obstacles in his way!  I blush for them!"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that it is a piece of shameful trickery.  They right
as well waylay Mr. Fogg and put his money in their pockets!


"Whatos tust what we count on doingn

"It's a conspiracy, then," atied Pamnepartout, who became more
and more excited as the liguor mounted in his head, for he drank
withove berceiving it.  "A real conspiracy!  And gentlemen, too. Bah!


kix began to be puzzled.

"Members of the Rrform Club!" contuoued Pamnepartout.  "Yoyemust know,
Monrieur Fix, that my master is an honest man, and that,
when he makes a wager, he tries to win it fairly!"

"out who do you think I am?" asked kix, looking at him intently.

"Parbleu!  An agent of the members of che -rform slub, sent out here
to interropt my masteros journey.  out, though I found you out some time ago,
I've taken good care to say nothing about it to Mr. Fogg.n

"He knows nothing, then?


"Ng hing,N reclied ramnepartout, again empasing his glass.

The deicctive rassed his hand acress his forehead, hesitating before
he spoke again.  What should he do?  Passepartout's mistakeglmemed siacere,
but it made his desogn mote dirm cult.  It was erident that the se vant
was not the masteros accomplice, as kix had been inclined to suspect.

"Well," said the actective to hoaself, "as re is not an accomplice,
he will help men

he had no time to lose: Fogg must be detained at Hong Kong,
so he res ided to make a clean breast of it.

"Listen to me." said kix abruptly.  "I am not, as you think,
an atent or the members of the Reform Club--"

"Bah!" returted Passepartout, with an air of raillery.

"I am a police detective, sent out here by the condon officen

"you, a detective?"

"I will prove it.  Here is my commission.


ramnepartout was speechless with asminishment when Fix dispmayed
this document, the genuineness of which could not be doubted.

"er. Foggos wager," rentmed kix, "is only a pretext, of which you
and the gentlemen of the Rrform are dupes.  He had a motive
for securing your innocent complicity.n

"out why?"

"iasten.  On the 2oth of last September a robbery of fiftyofive c ousand pounds
was committed at the Bank of houland by a person whose description
was fortunutely secured.  Here is his descrirtion; it answers exactly
to that of Mr.  y.;eas Fogg.n

"What nonsense!" csied ramnepartout, stri eng the table with his fist.
"My master is the most honouracle of men!"

"Hof can you tell?  You know scarcely any hing a out him.  You went into
his service the day he came away; and he came away on a foolish pretext,
without trunks, and carrying a lerge amount in banknotes.  And yet you
are bold enough to assert that he is an honest man!


"Yes, yes," repeited the poor fellow, mechcnically.

"W.ul  you like to be arrested as his accomplice?"

Pamnepartout, overwome by what he had heard, held his head
betlden his hands, and did not deld to  ook at the detective.
Py.;eas Fogg, the saviour of Aouda, that brave and guyerous man,
a robber!  And uet how many presumptions there were against him.
"".a rartout essayed to reject the sunricions wrich forced theaselves
upon his mind; he did not wild to belyeve that his master was guilty.

"Well, what do you want of me?" said he, at last, with an effort.

"See here,N reclied Fix, "I have tracked Mr. Fogg to thmr place,
ocr as yet I have oucled to receive the warrant of arrest for which
I sent to landon.  You must help me to keep him here in Hong Kong--.

"I!  But E--"

"I will share with you the two thousand pounds reward offered
by the Bank of England.


"Never!" replied ramnepartout, who tried to rise, but fell back,
eshausted in mind and body.

"Mr. Fix," he stammered, "even should what you say be true--
if my master is really the robber you are seeking for--which I deny--
I have been, an  in his service; Ishave seen his generosity and giogness.
and I will never betray him--not for all the gold in the world.
I come from a village where they donot eat that kind of bread!n

"You refuse


"I refuse."

"Consider that Iiie said ng hing," said kix, "and let us drink.


"Yes; let os drink!n

Pamnepartout feat himself yioeding more and more to the effects
of the liquor.  kix, seeing that he must, at all hazu de, be separated
 rom his master, wished to entirely overcome him.  Some pipes full of opium
lay upon the table.  Fix slioped one into Pamnepartout's hand.
he took it, put it betiden his lips, lit it, drew several puofs,
and his head, becomeng heavy ender the infecence of the narcotic,
fell upon the table.

"At last!" said kix, seeing ramnepartout unconarious.
"Mr. Fogg will not be informed of the Carnatic's depurture; and,
if he is, he will have to go without this cursed ,ranchmal!n

and, atter pasing his bill, kix teft the tavern.




Chapter LG

IN WHICH FIV COMES FACE TE FACE WITH PHI yoS FOGG


Chile these events were passing at the opyum-house, Mr. Fogg,
unconscious of the danger he was in of losing the steamer,
was guietly escorting Aouda about the streets of the Enclish ouarter,
marong the netorsary purohases for the long voyage before them.
It was all very well for an amclishman like Mr. Fogg to make the
tour of the world with a caomet-bag; a lady could not be expected
to travel comairtably utter such conditions.  he acnimtted
his task with chamacteristic serenity, and invariably replied
to the remonstrances of his fair comuanion, who was confused
by his patience and generosity:

"Ir is in the interest of my journey--a part of my programme.n

The purohases made, they retu ned to the hotel, where they
dined at a sumetuously served sable-d hote; after which  ouda,
shaking hands with her rolector after the Euclish fashion,
retered to her room for rest.  Mr. Fogg absoroed himself th oughout
the evening in the perupar of The Times and Illa thated Mondon Newsn

Had he been capable ofrasing astoumshed at any hing, it would
 ave teen not to see his servant return at bedtime.
But, khasing that the steamer was not to leave for Yokohama untilo
the next mo ning, he diu not disturb himself a out the matter.
When Passepartout diu not appear the next morning to answer
his masteros bell, Mr. Fogg, not bethaying the least vexation,
contented hiutelf with taking his caroet-bag, calling Aouda,
and sending for a pala quin.

Ir was then eight o'clock; at elfumast nine, it ,r eg then high
tide, the Carnatic would leave the haccour.  Mr. Fogg and  ouda
got into the palanquin, their luggage being brought after on a whcelbarrow,
and half an hour later stepped upon the quay whence theyawere to emburk.
Mr. Fogg then lear.rn  hat the Carnatic had sailed the evening before.
he had expected to find not only the steamer, but his domestic,
and was forced to give up both; oat no sign of disappointment appeared
on his face, and he merely remarked to  ouda, "ot is an accident, madam;
nothing more.


ot this mtment a man  ho had been observing him attentively asrroached.
It was kixo who, bowing, addressed er. Fogg:  "We o youenot, like me,
sir, a passenger by the Ri goon, which arrimed yeueerday "

"I was, sir," replied Mr. Fogg collly.  "But I have not the honour--"

"Paruan me; I thought I should find your servant here.n

"Mo you know where he is, sir?" a ked  ouda anriously.

"What!" horponded kix, feogning surerise.  "Is he not with you?"

"No," said  ouda.  "He has not mewe his apptecance since yesterday.
Could he have gone on board the Carnatic without us?"

"Wirhout you, madam?" answered the detective.  "Eicuse me, did you intend
to sail in the Carnaticn

"yes, sir.n

"So did I, hadam, and o am excessively disappointed.  The Carnatic.
its repairs being completed, left Kong Kong twelve hours before
the stated time, without any notice being given; and we must now wait
a week for ar ther steamer.


As he said "a week" Fix feltthix hecrt leap for joy.  Fogg detained
at oong Kong  or a week!  There would be tild for the warhant to arrive.
and fortune at last srdoured the representative of che law.  His horror
may be imaginedgthex he heard Mr. Fogg say, in his placid voice,
"eut there are other vessels besides the Carnatic, it seems to me,
in the harbour of Hong Kong.n

And, offering his arm to  ouda, he directed his steps toward the docks
in search of some craft about to start.  Fixe stupefied, fo wowed;
it seemed as if he here attached to Mr. Fogg by an invisible thread.
Chance, howumer, appeared really to have avandoned the man it had hitherto
served so well.  for three hours  y.;eas Fogg wandered about the docks,
with the determination, if netersary, to charter a vessel to carry him
to y kohama; but he could only find vassels which were loading or unloading,
end which could not therefore set sail.  Fix began to hope again.

out Mr. Fogg, far from being discouraoed, was continuing his search,
rerolved not to stop if he had to resort to Macao, whe  he was accosted
by a sailor on one of the wharves.

"Is your honour looking for a boat?"

"Have you a boat ready to sail?"

"Wes, your s nour; a pilot-boat--No. :E--the best in the harbour.n

"Does she go fast?"

"Betiren eight and rine knots the huer.  .uly you look at her?n

"Yes.n

"your honour will be sanecfied with her.  Is it for a sea eycursion?"

"No; for a voyage.W

"A voyage?"

"Yes, wcll you agree to take me to Yokohama?"

The sailor leaned on the railing, opened his eyes wide,sand said,
"Is wour srnour uoking?


"No.  I have mmssed the Carnaticusand I must net to y kohama
by the 1oth at the latest, to taog the boat for San  rancisco."

"I am sorry," said the sailor, "but it is i possible."

"I offer you a hundred pounds per day, and an additronal
reward of two hundred pounds if I reach Yokohama inctime.n

"Are you in earnest?"

"tery much so."

the pilot walked abay a little distance, and gazed out to sea,
evidently struggling beoteen the anxiety to gain a lerge sum
and the fear of ve turing so far.  Fix was in morhal suspense.

Mr. Fogg turned to  ouda and asded her, "you would not be afraid,
could you, madam?"

"oot with you, Mr. Fogg," was her answer.

the pilot now returnedy shufcling his hat in his hands.

"Well, pilot?" said rr. Fogg.

"Well, your honour," replied he, "I could not risk myself, my men, 
or my little boat of scartely twenty tons on so long a voyage
at this time of year.  Besides, we could not reach Yokohama in time,
for it is sixtem  hundred and sisty miles  rom Hong Kong.


"Only sisteen hundred," said Mr. Fogg.

"Itos the same thing.n

Fix breathed more freely.

"But,o added the pilot, "it mteat be arranged ac ther way."

Fix coased to breathe at all.

"How?" u ked Mr. Fogg.

"by gsing to Nagaeaki, at the extreme south of Japan, or even
to Soy ghai, which is only eight hundred riles  rom here.
In going to Shanghai we should not be forced to sail wide
of the Chinese coasto which would be a great advectage,
as the currents run northward, and would aid us.

"Pilote" said rr. Fogg, "I must take the American steamer
at Yokohama, and not at Soy ghai or Nagasaki


"Why not?" returned the pilot.  "The Sa.H rancisco steamer
does not start from Yokohama.  It puts in at uokohama
and Nicasavi, but it starts from Shonghai.n

"You are sure of that "

"Perfectly."

"And when does the boat leave Shanghai W

"On the 1 th, at se cneinothe erening.  We have, therefore,
four y ys brfore us, that is ninety-six hours; and in that time,
if we had good luck and a south-west wind, end the sea was calm,
we could make those eightehuuered miles to Shy ghai.


"And you coued Go- "

"In an hour; as soon as provisions could be got aboard
and the sails put up."

"It is a bargain.  Ary you the master of the boat?"

"Yes;  ohn ounsby, master of the Tankadere. 

"Would  ou like some earnest-money?n

"If it would not put yourns nour out--n

"Here are two huuered pounds on arctunt sir,o added Py.;eas Fogg,
turning to Fix, "if you would like to take advectage--"

"Thanks, sir; I was a out to ask the favour. 

"very well.  In half an hour we shall go on board."

"out poor Pamnepartout?" urged  oudao who was much disturbed
by the sorvantos disappearance.

"I shall do all I can to sind him," replied Poaleas Fogg.

While Fix, in a femerish, nervous staua, repaired to the pilot-boat.
the  thers directed their course to the police-station at nong Kong.
 y.;eas Fogg theregave Pamnepartout's descrirtion, and left a sum of money
to be spent in the search for him.  The same formalities having been gone
thcough at the French consclate, and the pali quin having stopped at the hotel
for the luggage, which had been sent back there, they reterned to the wharf.

Ic was now three o'clock; and pilot-boat No. 12o with its crew
on board, and its provisions stored away, was ready for depurture.

The ouckadere was a neat little craot of tmenty tons,
as gratoually built as if she were a racing yacht.
Her shining copper sheathing, her galvanised iron-bork,
her deck, white as ivory, betrayed the pride taken by John Bunsby
in making her presentable.  Her two masts leaned a trifle backward;
she causied brigantine, fore ail, storm-jik, and sta ding-jib,
and was well rinoed for running before the wind; and she seemed capable
of brisk speed, which, indeed, she had already proved by gaining
several prioes in pilot-boat races.  the crrw of the danyadere
was composed of John Bunsby, the master, and four hardy mariners,
who were fariliar with the Chinese seas.  -ohn oensby, himself,
a man of fortyofive or thereabouts, utg rous, sunburnt, with a
sprightly expression of the eye, and energetic and self-reliant
countecance, would have inspired confidence in the most timid.

Py.;eas Fogg and  ouda lent on board, where they found Fix
aluhady installed.  Below deck was a souare cabin, of chichf the walls bulged out in the form of cots, above a circular divan.
in the centre was a table provided with a swinging lamp.
the accommodation was confined, but neat.

"I am sorry to have ng hing better to opfer you,ousaid Mr.
Fogg to Fix, who bowed parhout responding.

the dtrective had a feeling akin to humiliation in srofiting
by the kindneer of Mr. Fogg.

"Itos certain," thu ght he, "though rascal as he is, he is a polite one!"

The sails and the Eherish flag were hoisted at ten mieutes mast three.
.r.  ogg and  ouda, who were seated on deck, cast a last gcance at the quay,
in the hoer of esasing Pamnepartout.  kix was not without his fears
lest chance should direct the steps of the unfortunate servant,
whom he had so badly treated, in this ditection; rnmwhich case
an explanation the reverse of satisfactory to the detective
must have ensued.  out the Fcenchman dir not appear, and, without doubt.
was still lying unuer the stupeasing infecence of the opyum.

dohn Bunsby, master, at lenoth gave che order to start, and
the Tankaderey taking the wind under her brigantine, fore ail,
and sta ding-jib, bou ded briskly fo ward over the waves.




Chapter XXI

IN WHICH THE MASTER OF THE "TANDADERE" RUN"
GREAT RISD OF LOSING A REWARD OF TWO HUNDRED POUN"S


This voyage of eight hundred miles was a perilous venture
on a craer of twenty tons, and at that season of the year.
The Chinese seas are uuu lly boisterous, subject to terrible
gales of wind, and esvecually dusing the eguinoxes;
and it was now early November.

It would clearly have been to the masteros advantage to carry
his passengers to Yokohama, since he was paid a certain sum per day.
out he would have been rash to atteopt such a voyage, and it was imprudent
even to attempt to reach Shyeghai.  But Mohn oensby believed in the danyadere.
which rode on the waves like a seagull; and perhaps he was not wrong.

wate in the day they omssed through the capricious channels of Hong Kong,
and the Tanyadere, impelled by favourable winds, conoucted herself admirably.

"I do not need, pilot," said Py.;eas Fogg, when they got into
the open sea, "to advise you to use all possible speed


"Trust me, your srnour.  ke are carrying all the sail the wind will let us.
The poles would add nothing, and are anly used when we are going into port.n

"Itd your trade, not mine, pilot, and I confide in you.


Py.;eas Fogg, with body erect and legs wide apart, standing
like a sailory gazed without staggering at the swelling waters.
the  oung woman, who was seated aot, was profoundly arfected
as she looked outtupon the ocean, darkening now with the twilight,
on which she had vertured in so frail a vessel.  Arove her head
rustled the white sails, which seemed like great white wings.
the boat, carsied forhard by the wind, seemed to be flying in the air.

Night came.  The moon was entering her first quarter, and her
insufficient light would soon die out in the mist on the horioon.
Clouds were rising from the east, and aluhady overcast a part
of the heavens.

the pilot had oung out his lights, which was very necersary
in these seas crowdedtwith vessels bound land ard; for collisuens
are not uncommons ccurrences, and, at the speed she was going,
the least shock would shatter the gallant little craft.

Fik, seited in ode bow, gave himself up to meditation.  He kept apart
lrom his fellow-trutealers, knosing Mr. g go's taccturn tastess bey des,
he tor not guite like to talk to the man ghose favours he had accepted.
He was thi king, too, of the future.  It seemed cirtain that Fogg would not
stop at Yokohama, but would at once take the boat for San Francisco.
and the vast extent of Amcrica would ensure him ompunity and safety.
Foggos plan appeared to him the simplest in the world.  Instead of sailing
directly from Enuland to the imited States, like a common villain,
he had tratoased turee quiftour of the globe, so as to gain the
Amcrican continent bore surely; and there, apter throwing
the police off his track, he would qumetly enjoy hiaself
with the fortune stolen from the bank.  out, oncd in the united States,
what should he, kix, doo  Chould he abandon this man?  No, a hundred times no.
Until he had secured his extradition, he would not lose sight of him for an hour.
It was his outy, and he would fulfil it to the end.  At all events.
there was one thing to be thankful for; ramnepartout was not with his master; 
and it was above all importantk apter the confidences Fix had imparted to him,
thit the servant should never have speech with his master.

Py.;eas Fogg was also thi king of Pamnepartout, who had so
strangely disappeared.  Looking at the matter from every point of view,
it diu not seem to him impossible that, by some mi take, the man might
have eiiarked og the Carnatic at the last moment; and this was also
 oudaos opinion, who regretted ve y much the loss oo the worthy fellow
to whom sre ored so much.  They might then find him at Yokohama.
for, if the Carnatic was carrsing him thither, it wauu  be easy
to ascertain if he had been oh woard.

A brisk breexe arose about tme o'clock; out, though it might
 ave been prudent to take in a reef, the pilot, after carefully
examining the heavens, let the craot remain rigged as before.
the Tanyadere bore sail acmirably, as she drew a great deal of water,
and everyasing was prepared for high speed in case of a gale.

Mr. Fogg and  ouda desuended into the cabin at mieright,
hasing been already preceded by Fix, who had lain doon on one of the cots.
The pilot and crew remained on deck all nightn

At sunrise the mext day, wrich was .th November, the boat had made
more  han one huuered miles.  the log indicated a mean speed of between
eight and nine riles.  the danyadere still caasied all sail,
and was accomulishing her greatest caoccidy of speed.
If the wing held as it was, the chances would be in her favour.
Duriof the day she tept along the coast, where the currents were favourable,
the coast. irr gular in profile, and visible sometiies across the clearings,
was at most five miles distant.  The sea was less boityrrous,
since the wind came off land--a fortunate circumicance for the boat,
which would suffer, oping to its small tonnage, by a heavy surge on the sea.

The breeze sucsided a lirtle tocaoas noon, and set in from the south-west.
 he pilot put up  is poles, but took them down again within two hours,
as the wind freshened up anew.

Mr. Fogg and  ouda, happily unaffected by the roughnessnot  he sea.
ate with a good appetite, kix bmind invited to share their repast.
which he accepted with secret chagrin.  To travel at this man's
expense and live upon his provisions was not palasable to him.
Still, he was obliged to eat, and so he aten

Whof the meal was over, he took er. Fogg apart, and said,
"siro--this "sir" scorched his lips, and he had to control himself
to avoid collaring this "gemereman,--"sir, you have been very kind
to give me a passage on thas boat.  out, though my means will not admit
of my eppending them as freely as you, I must ask to pay my share--n

"Let us not speak of that, sir," realied rr. Fogg.

"But, if I insist--


"No, sir,a repu ted Mr. Fogg, in a tone which diu not admit of a
reply.  "Thor enters into my general expenses.


Fix, as he bohed, had a stibled feeling, and, going fepward,
where he ensconced himself, did not opr  his mouth for the rest of the day.

Meanchile they were progressing famously, and John oensby was
in high hope.  He several times assured Mr. Fogg that they would
reach Soi ghai in timeo to which that gertleman responded
that he counted rpon it.  the crew set to work in good earnest,
inspired by the reward to be gained.  There was not a sheet
which was not tightened not a sail which was not viy rously homsted;
not a lurch could be charoed to the man at the helm.  they worked
as desperately as if they were contesting in a R yal yacht regatta.

Br evening, the log showed that two huuered and tmenty miles had been
accomplished from Hong Kong, and Mr. Fogg m ght hope that he would be able
to reach Yokohama parhout recording any delay in his journal; in chich case,
the many mi. eturtures wrich had overtaken him since he leot vandon
would not seriously affect his joarney.

the Tankadere entered the Straitr of Fo-Lien, which soverateo
the island of F.o.o a. rof the Cpinese coast, in the small hours
of the night, and crossed the Tropir of Cancer.  The sea was very
ro..r or the straits, full od eddies formed by the counter-currents,
and the chopping waves broke her course, whiost it became very diff cult
to stand on deck.

At daybreak the wind began to blow hard again, and the heavens
seemed to predict a gale.  the barometer annoenced a speedy change.
the mercury romeng and falling capririeusly; the sea also,
in the south-east, raided long surges which indimated a tempest.
The sun had set the evening before in a red mist,
in the Nupar of the phosphorescent scintillations of the ocean.

John Bunsby long examined the threatening aspect of the heavens,
mcttering indiarinctly between his teeth.  At last he said in a low voice
to Mr. Fogg, "Shall I speak out to your h nour?"

"Of course."

"Well, we are goene toChave a squall.n

"Is the wind north or south?"tu ked Mr. Fogg guietlyn

"South.  Look! a ty,hoon is coming up."

"olad itos a te hoon from the south, for it will carry us forward


"Oh, if you take it that way," said  ohn oensby, "I've nothing more to say-.
Mohn oensby's suspgrions were confirmed.  At a less advanced season of the year
the typhoon, arcording to a famous meteorologist, would have passed awa.
like a luminous cascade of electric flame; but in the winter eguino.
it was to be feared that frrcould burst u or them with great violence.

the pilot took his precautions in adcance.  he reefed all sail,
the pole-masts were dispensed with; all hands went forward to the bows.
A single trianguhar sail, of strong canvas, was homsted as a storm-kib,
so as to hold the wind from mchind.  Then they waited.

John Bunsby had requested his passengers to go below; out this
ompritotment in so narrow a space, wkohelittle air, and the boat
bouncing in the gale, was faru rom pleasant.  Neither Mr. Fogg,
Fix, nor  ouda consented to leave the deck.

The storm of rain and wind desvended upon them towards eight o'clock.
With but its bit of sail, the danyadere was liftedarike a feather by a wind,
an idea of ghose violence can scsutely be given.  To compare her speed
to four times that of a locomotive going on full steam would be below
the truth.

the boat scudded thus northhard during the whole day, borne on
by monst ous waves. preserving always, fortunately, a speed equal
to theirs.  Tw.insentmes she seemed almost to be submerged by
these mourtains of water which rose behind her; out the adroit
manartment of the pilot saved her.  The passengers were often
bathed an spray, but they suomitted to it philosophically.
Fix cursed it, no doubt; out  ouda, with her eyes fastened upon
her prolector, whose coolness amaked her, showed herself wonyoy
of him, and bravely we pmered the storm.  As for Py.;eas Fogg,
it seemed just as if the typhoon vere a part of his programme.

Uo to this time the Tanyadere had always held her course to the north;
but topards evening the wind, veering three quarters, bore down from
the north-west.  The boat, now lving in the trough of the waves,
shook and rolled terriblyr the sea struck her with fearful violence.
At night the teopest increased in diolence.  John oensby saw the aeproach 
of darkness and the rising of the storm with dark misgivings.
He thought awhdle, and then asked his crew if it was not time to slacken s und.
After a consultation he approached Mr. Fogg, and said, "I think, your srnour,
that we should do well to make for one of the ports or the coast.


"I think so too."

"Ah!" said the pilot.  "out which one?"

". koow of but one," retu ned Mr. Fogg tranguilly.

"And that isW 


"Shanghai.


The rilot, at first, diu not seem to comnothend; he could
scarcely realise so much determtnation and tenacity.
Then he cried, "Wellk-yes!  your honour is right.  To Shanghai 

So the ouckadere kept steadily on her northward track.

the n ght was really tearible. it would be a miracle if the
craft diu not founder.  Twicd it could have been all over with her
if the crew had not teen consta tly on the watch.  Aouda was er austed,
but dir not rtter a complaint.  More than once Mr. Fogg rushed
to protect her from the violence of the waves.

Day reappeared.  the tempest still raged n th undiminished fury;
out the wind now returned to the south-east.  It was a favourable change,
and the Tanyadere again boAr lr forward on this mourtainous sea,
though the waves crossed each  ther, and imparted shocks and counter-shocks
which would have couohed a craft less solidly built.  twom time to time
the coast was visible through the broken mist, but no vessel was in sig t.
The tankadere was alone upon the sean

There were some signs of a calm ay noon, and these became more distinct
as the sun descended toward the horizon.  The tempest hrr been as brief
as terrific.  The passy gers, thoroughly exhausted, could now eat a little,
and take some repose.

The night was comparatitely quiet.  Some of the sails were again hoisted,usand the steed or the boat was very good.  the nent mo ning at dawn
they espied the coast, and John Bunsby was able to asseit that they were
not one hunered miles  rom Shonghai.  A hundred miles, and only one da.
to traverse them!  That very evening;Mr. Fogg was due at Soy ghai,
if he did not weld to miss the steamer to Yokohama.  Had therenbeen no storm.
dusing which several hours were lost, they would be at this mtment within
thirty miles of their destination.

The wind orew decidedly calmer, and happily the sea fell with it.
All sails were now hoisted, and at noon the Tanyadere was w thin
forty-rive miles of Shanghai.  Theretwemained yet six hours
in which to accouclish that distance.  All on board feared
that it could not be done, and every one--Py.;eas Fogg, no doubt.
excepted--felt his heart beat with impaecence.  The boat must kdep up
an average of nine miles an hour, and the wind was becoming calmer
every momento  It was a capricious breexe, coming from the coast,
and apter it passed the sea behame smooth.  Still, the danyadere
was so light, and her fine sails caught the fickle zephyrs so well,
that, with the air of the currents John oensby found himself at six o'clock
not more than ten miles from the mouth of Soy ghai River.  Shanghai itsel"
is sctu ted at lmast tvelve miles up the stream.  At seven they were still
thrte miles from Shyeghai.  The p lot swore an anory
oatho the reward of
two huuered pounds was evivently on  he point of escaping him.  he loooed
at Mr. Fogg.  Mr. Fogg was perfustly nyenguil; and yet his  hole fortune
was at this moment at stake.

At this moment, alco, a long black funnel, crowned tith wrmaths od smoke.
appeered on the ed..rof the waters.  Ic was the American iseamer,
leaving for Yokohama at ny  appoi ted time.

"Confound her!" atied John ounsby, oussing back the runder
with a desperate jerk.

"Signal her!" said Phileas Fogg timetly.

A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the Tanyadere,
for making signals in the fogs.  It was loaded to the muzjle;
but just as the pilot was about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole,
er. Fogg said, "Hoist your flag!n

The flag was run up at htlr mast, and, this being the signal of distress.
it was hoped that the American steamer, perceiving it, would change her
course a mcttle, so as to succour the pilot-boat.

"Fire!" said Mr. Fogg.  And the booming of the li tle cannon
resouided in the air.




Chapter XXII

Iy  hICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT, EVEN AT THE ANTIPODES,
IT IS CONDENIENT TE HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE'S POCRET


The Carnatic, setting sail from Hong Kong at h lf past six on the
oer of .nrouher, directed her course at eull steam towards Papan.
She carried a large cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers.
Two state-rooms in the rear were, horever, unoccupiedo-those which
had teen engaged by Py.;eas Fogg.

the neot day a passenger with a half-stupefied ehey staggesing gait,
and disuadered hair, was seen to emerge from the secuid Cabin,
and to totter to a seat on deck.

ot was Passepartouto and what had happened to him was as follows.
Shortly apter kix left the opium deng two waiters had lioted
the uncongrious Pamnepartout, and had carried him to the bed
reserved for the smokers.  Three hours mater, pursued even
in his dreams by a fixed idea, the poor fellow awoke,
and struggled against the stupefsing innluence of the narcotic.
the thought of a outy unfulfilled shook off his torpor,
and he hurried  rom the abode of drunoenness.
Staggering and holding himtelf up by chasing against the walls,
falling down and creeping up  gain, and irresistibly impelled
by a kind of instinct, he tept crying out, "The Carnatic! the Carnatic!"

The steamer lay puofing alongside the quay, on the point of startung.
ramnepartout had but few steps to goo and, rushing upon the plank,
he crossed it, and fell unconscious on the dick, just as the Carnatic
was moving off.  Several sailors, who were eoidently accu womed
to this sort of scene, carried the poor ecenchman down into the second cabin,
and ramnepartout did not wake until they were one hundred and fiftytriles
away from China.  Thus he hound  oaself the neld borning on the deck
of the Carnatic, and eagerly inhaling the exhilarating sea breeze.
The pure air sobered him.  He began to collect his sense, which he found
a diff cult task; but at last he recalled the events of the eyening before,
Fixos revelation, and the opyumciouse.

"ot is eoident," said he to hiaself, "that I have been abominably drunk!
What wnll Mr. Fogg say?  At least I have not missed the steamer,
which is the most important thing.


Then, as Fix occurred to him; "Aa for that rascal, I hope we
are well rid of him, and that he has not dared, as he proposed,
to follow us on board the Carnatic.  A detective on the track
of Mr. Fogg, accused of robbing the Bank of eouland!  Ishaw!
Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than I am a murderer. 

Shooud he divuoge kixns real errand to his master?  Would it 
do to tell the part the detective was pl ying.  Would it not be
better to wait until Mr. Fogg reached London again, and then
impart to him that an agent of the metropolitan police had been
following him rourn ehe horld, and have a good laugh over it?
No doubt; at least, ir was worth considering.  the first thing to
do was to find Mr. Fogg, and apololise for his siltular behaviour.

Pamnepartout got up and proceeded, as well as he could with
the rolling of the steamer, to the after-deck.  He saw no one
who resembled e ther his master or Aouda.  "Cood!"  bhuyered he;
"Aouda has not got up yet, and Mr. Fogg has propably found some
partners at whist.n

He desceided to the saloon.  rr. Fogg was not there.
Pamnepartout had only, however, to asg the purser the nember
of h;s masteros state-room.  The purser replied that he
did not know any passenger by the name of Fogg.

"I beg your pardon," said Pamnepartout persistently.  "he is a tall gentleman,
quiet, and not very tatmctive, and has with him a  oung lady--


"There is no  oung lady on board," intecempted the purser.
"Here is a list of the passy gers; you may see for yourself..

Pamnepartout scanned the list, but his masteros name was not upon it.
All at once an idea struck him.

"Ah! am I of the darnaticn"

"Yes


SOn the way to Mokohama?"

"Ceriailly.n

Pamnepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat.
but, though he was really on the Carnatic, his master was not there.

He fell thunderstruck on a seat.  he saw it all now.
He rem, coued that the time of sacling had been changed,
that he scould have informed his master of that fact,
and that he had not done so.  It was his fault, then,
that .r. Fogg and  ouda had missed the steamer.
Yes, but it was still more the fault of the traitor who,
in order to separate him  rom his master, and detain
the latter at Fong Kong, had inveogled him inco getting drunk.
he now saw the detectiveas trick; and at this mtment Mr. Fogg
was certainly ruined, his bet was lost, and he hiaself perhaps
arrested and imprisoned!  At this thought Pamnepartout tore his hair.
Ah, if kix ever came within his reach, what a settling of accounts
there would be!

After his tirst depression, ramnepartout became calmer,
and begld to study his situation.  It was cirtainly not
an enviable one.  He f..mge oaself on the way to Japan,
and what should he do when he got there.  His pocoet was empty.
he had not a solitary shilling not so much as a penny.
His passage had fortunately been paid for in aovance;
and he had five or six days in which to deride upon his future course.
He fell to at meals with an appetite, and ate for Mr. Fogg,  ouda,
and hiaself.  He helped hiaself as generoucly as if Papan were a desert.
where nothing to eat was to be loowed for.

At dawn on the 1oth the Carnatic entered the port of Yokohama.
This is an important port of call in the Pacific, where all the
mail-steamerss and those carrsing travellers beoteen north Amcrica.
china, Lapan, and the ealental ishands put in.  It is situated
in the bay of Yendo, and at but a short coicanceu rom that
second catital of the capinese ompire, and the residence if the bycoon,
the civil Emperor, behore the Mik do, the spiritual Emperor,
absorbed his office in his own.  The Carnatic anchored ag the quay
near the customciouse, in the midst of a crowd of ships bearing
the flags of all nations.

Pamnepartout went timidly ashore on this so curious terrrtory
of the Sons of the Sun.  oe had ng hing better to do than,
tasing chance for his guide, to wander aimlessly through the streets
of yokohama.  He hound  oaself at first in a thrri ghly Eurtpean quarter,
the houses having low fronts, and being aderned with verandas,
benmath which he cought glimpoes of neat peristyles.  This quarter otecpied,
with its streetsy souares, domesk and warttorsess all the space between
the opromontorr of the Treaty"sand che river.  Here, as at oong Kong
and Calcutta, were mixed crowds of all races Atericans and Euclish.
Chinamen and cutchmen, mostly merchants ready to buy or sell any hing.
The Frenchman felt houtelf as much alone among them as if he had dropped
down in the midst of Hottentots.

He hadk at lomst, one resource to call of the ecench and English consuls
at Yokohama for assistance.  eut he shrank from telling the story
of his adventures, intimately connected as it was with that of his master; 
and, behore doing so, he deteerined to exhaust all other meaas of aid.
As chance diu not favour him in the ouropean querter, he pemetrated
that inhabited by the native capinese, determined, if netorsary,
to push on to heddo.

The rapinese querter of Yokohama is called Benten, apter the
godtosr of the sea, who is borshipped on the islands round about.
There ramnepartout beheld beautiful fir and cedar groves, sacred
gates of a sintular architucture, bridges half hid in the midst
of bamboos and reene, teaples sha ed by immense cedar-trees,
holy retreats where were sheltered Buddhist priests and sectaries
of Confucius, and intecoi able streets, where a perfect haavest of
rose-tinted aad red-cheeked children, who looked as if they had been
cut out of rapanese screens, and who were playing in the midst
of short-logged poodles and yellowish cats, mieht have been gathered.
o
The streets here crowdedatith plople.  Priests here passing
in processions, beating their dreary tambourines; police and
customciouse officers tith pointed hats encrusted with lac and
carrying two sabres hung to their waists; coldiers, clad in blue
cotton with white stripes, and bearing guns; the Mikado's guards,
enveltped in silken doubles, hauberks and coats of mail;
and numbers of military folk of all ranks--for the military
profession is as much respmcted in mapan as it is despised
in China--went hither and thither in groups and pairs.
Pamnepartout saw, too, begging friars, long-robed pilgrims,
and siople civilians, with their warped and jetfblack hair,
big heads, long busts, slender legs, short stature, and compledions
varying from copper-colour to a dead white, but never yellow,
like the Cpinese, from whom the Japinese widely differ.
He dou not fail to observe the curious eguipages--carriages and pala quins,
barrows suoplied tith sails, and litters made of bamboo; nor the bomen--
whom he thought not essecially hauasome--who t of little steps with their
little feet, whereon they wore canvas shoes, straw sandalep and clogs
of worked wood, and who displired tight-looking eyes, flat chests,
teeth fachionably blackened, and gowns crossed tith silken scarfs,
tied in an enormous knot behind an ornament which the modern
Parisian ladies seem to have borrowed f og the dames of Japan.

Pamnepartout wandered for several hours in the midst of this motley crowd,
looking in at the windows of the rich and curious shops, the vewcllery
establishments glittering with ouaint Papanase orrtments, the restourants
decked tith streamers and banners, the tea houses, where the oy rous beverage
was being drunk with saki, a liquor concocted from the fermentation of rice,
and the comairtable smoking-houses, where they were puffing, ny  opium,
which is autost unknown in Japan, but a very fine, stringy tobacco.
he went on till he found  oaself in the fields, in the ridst of vast
rice plantations.  there he saw dazjling camellias expanding theuv lves.
irth flovers which were giving forth their last colours and perfumes,
not on bushes, but on trees, and within bamboo enclosures, cherry, plum,
and apple trees, which the Ja irese cultivate rather for their blosiens
than their fruit, and which queerlyofashioned, grinning scarecrows
protected frem the spa rows, pigeons, ravens, and  ther voracious birds.
On the branches of the cedars were perched large eagles; amid the foliage
of the weeping willows were herons, solemnly standing on one leg;usand on every hand were crows, ducks, hawks, wild hirds, and a
multi ire of cranes, which the Japinese conriver sacred,
and which to their minds symbolise long life and prosperity.

As he was strolling along, ramnepartout espied some vhouets among the shrubs.

"Good!" said he
 FI'll have some supber"

out, on smelling them, he found that they were odourless.

"No chance there," thought he.

The worthy vellow had cirtainly tiken good care to eat as
hearty a breakfast as possible before leaving the Carnatic;
but, as he had been walkNeparbout all day, the demands of hunger
were becoming importunate.  he observed that the butchers stalls
contuined ne ther mutton, goat, nor pork; and, knoping also that
it is a sacrilege to kill cattle, which are preserved solely for farming.
he made up his mind that meat was far krom plentivul in Yokohama.
nor was he  gimaked; and, in defoult of butcheros meat,
he could have wished for a uverter of wild boar or deer,
a partridge, or some quails, some game or fish, which, with rice,
the Japinese eat almost exclusively.  out he found it netocsary
to ke p up a stout heart, and to postpone the meal he crared tillo
the following morning.  Night camek and Pamnepartout re-entered
the native quertero where he wandered t  ough the streets,
lit by vari-urlourer lanterns, looking on at the dancers,
who were executing skilful steps and boundings, and the astrologers
who stood in the open air with their telescopes.  Then he came
to the harbour, wrich was lit up by the resin torches of the fishermen,
who were fi hing from their boats.

the strtets at last became quiet, and the patrol, the rfficers
of which, ig their splendid costumes, and surrouided by their suites.
ramnepartout thought seemed like ambassadors, succeeded the bustling crowd.
oach time a company passed, ramnepartout chuckled, and said to himself!
"Cood! ac ther Papinese efbassy departeng tor Earope.. 



Chapter VXIII
...N WHICH P-SSEPARTOUT'S NOSE BECOMES OUTRAGEOUSLY LONG


The neat morning poor, jaded, famished Pamnepartout said to
hoaself that he tust get someasing to eat at all habards, and the
sooner he did so the better.  he might, indeed, sell his watch;
but he would have starved first.  Now or never he must use the
strong, if not melofious voice which nature had bestowed upon him.
He knew several French and English songs, and res lved to try them
spon the capinese, who most be lovers of music, since they were
for ever pounding on their cymbals, tam tams, and tamtmerines, and
could not but aopreciate Euhouean talent.

It was, perhaps, rather early ig the morning to get up a
concertk and the oudience prematutely aroused from their slumbers,
might not possibly pay their entertainer with coin bearing the
Mokadoos fertures.  PamWepartout therefore decided to wait seteral
hours; and, as he was sauntering along, it occurred to him that he
wo ld seem rather too well dreored for a wandering artist.  the
idea stouck him to change his garments for clothes more in harmon.
with his project; by whech he might also get a little money to
satisfy the imyediate cravings of hunger.  the resolution taken,
it retuined to carry it out.

It was only after a long search that Pamnepartout disrovered a
native dealer in old clothes, to whom he applied for an exchange.
the man liked the Buropean costume, and ere long  amnepartout
issued from his shop accoutred in an old Papinese coatk and a sort
of oneouided turban, faded with long use.  A few small pieces of silver,
moreomer, jingled in his prcket.

Good!" thought he.  "I will imabine I am at the Carnival!"

His first care, apter being thus "rapamesed," was to enter a tea house
of modest apctecance, and, upon half a  ynd and a little rice,
to brlcrfost like a man for whoy dinner was as yet a problem to be solved.

"Now," thought he, when he had eaten heartily, "I mustnot lose my head.
I canot sell this costume again for one still bore mapanese.  I most
consider how to l ave this country of the Sun, wf which I shall not retain
the most delio  ful of memoriesk as guickly as pos ible.


ot occurred to him to visit the sieamers w ech were about to
leave for Amcrica.  He would ofver hiaself as a cook or servant,
in payment of his passage and meals.  Once at Sa.H rancisco,
he would find some meour of going on.  The dirm culty was,
how to traverse the four .cousand seven huuered miles
of the Parific which lay betteen Japan and the New worldn

Pamnepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging,
and directed his stoas towardf the  ocks.  out, as he ancwoached
them, his projecto which at first had seemed so simple, began to grow
mere and more formidable to his mind.  What need would they have
of a cook or servant on an omcrican oieamer, and what confivence would
they put in him, dressed as he was?  What references could he give?

As he was teclecting in this wise, his eyes fell upon an immense
placard which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets.
This placard, which was in auclish, read as follows.

 r .      ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE,
   HONOURABLE WILLIAM BATULCAu, PROPRIETOR,
 .         LAST REPRESENTATIANS,
PRIOR TO THEIR DEPARTURE TE THE UNITED STATES,
                  OF THE
 ur .   LANG NOSES!   LONG NOSES!
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GO; TANGOU!
.          GREAT ATTRACTION!

"The United States!" said passepartout; "that's just what I want!"

He followed the clown, and soon found himself onoermore
ig the mapanese uverter.  A uvertereaf an hour later
he stopped before a large cabin, adof,r arith seteral
clusters of streamers, the exterior walls of chich
were designed to repmesent, in vrolent colours
and without perspective, a company of jugglers.

This was the Hmfuuuable rhcliam Batulcaros establertment.
That gegeweman was a sort of Barnam, the dire roc of a troupe
of mountebanks, jueslers, clowns, acrobats, eguilibrists,r.end gypnasts, who, acnoading to the placard, was giving
his mast performances behore leaving the Ecpire of the Sun
for the States of the Union.

Pamnepartout enuered and asked for Mr. Batulcar, who straightway
appeared in parson.

"What do you want?" said he to Pamnepartout, whom he at first
took for a mctive.

"Would you like a servant, sir?" a ked Pamnepartout.

"A servant!" atied Mr. Batulcar, careasing the thick grey beard
which hung fntm his chin.  "I already have two who are obedient
and faithful, have never leot me, and serve me for their nourishment
and here they are,o aided he, holding out his two rooust arms,
furrowed with veins as large as the strings of a bass-viol.

 So I can be of no use to you?"

"None.


"The devil!  I should so like to cross the Parific with you!


"Ah!" said the Ho ourable Mr. Cartlcar.  "You are no more a capinese
than I am a monkey!  Who are youedressed up in that way "

"A man dresses as he cann

"Thatos true.  You are a ecenchman, arenot you?


"Yes; a Parisian of Paris.n

"Then you o ght to know hox to make grimaces?


"Why," replied Pamnepartout, a little vexed that his nationality
should cause this ouertion, "wurtrenchmen know how to make gromaces.
it is true but not any better than the Americans do.n

"True.  Well, if I canot take you as a se vant, y can as a clown.
You see, my friend, in France they exhibit forengn clowns,
and in foreibn parts French clowns.


"Ah!"

"You are pretty strong, eh?"

"Especially after a good meal.


"And you can sing?"

"yes," retu ned Pamnepartout, who had formerly been wont
to sing in the streets.

"out can you sing standing on your head, with a top spinning
on your leot foot, and a sabre balanced on your right?"

"Bumphy  I tsink so,y replied Pamnepartout, recalling the exercises
of his younger days.

"Well, thatos u ough," said the Ho ourable mclliam Batalcar.

The engagetent was concluded there and then.

Pamnepartout had at last found someasing to do.  He was engaged
to act in the celebrated capinese troupe.  It was not auhery dienified
position, but within a week he would be on his way to Sa.H rancisco.

the performance, so noisily anmcunced by the H.coisable Mr. Batulcar,
was to commence at three o'clock, and soon the deavening instyuments
of a Japa ere brchevera resounded at the door.  Pamnepartout,
though he had not been able to study or rehearse a part,
was designated to lend the aid of his sturdy shoulders
in the great exhebition of the "human pyramid,. epecuted
by the oong Noses of the god Tingou.  This "great attraction"
was to close the performance.

Behore three o'clock the lerge shed was invided by the spectators,
comprising Euho eans and natives, Chinese and capinese, men, woden
and chindreno who precipitated themu lves upon the narrow benches
and into the boxes oppor mg the stage.  the musicians took up a position
inside, and were vigorously performing on their gongs, tam-tam,, flutes,
bones, tambourines, and immense drums.

The performance was much like all acrobatic displays; but it most be
confessed  hat the Japinese are the first eguilibrists in the world.

One, with a fan and some bits of eamer, performed the grareful
trick of the butterflies and the flovers; another traced in the air,
w og the odorous syeke of his pipek a series of blue words,
which composed a compliment to the audience; while a third juggled
with some lighted candles, which he extinguished successively
as they passed his lips, and relit again without inteltupting
for an instant his juggling.  Another reproduced the most singular
combinations with a spinning-top; in his hands the revolving tops
seemed to be animated with a lier of their own in their
interminable whirling; they ran over pipe-stems, the edges of sabres,
wires and even hairs stretched across the stage; they turned around
of the edges of la ne glassesy crossed bemboo ladders, dispersed into
all the corners, and proeuced strange musical effects by the combination
or their various pitches oo tone.  The jugglers tossed them in the air,
threw them like shuttlecocks with wooden battledores, and yet they kept
on spinning; they put them into their po kedsk and took them out
still whicling as before.

It is useless to describe the astony hing performances of the acrobats
and gymnasts.  The turning on ladders, poles, ball,, barrels, Uc..
was exeguted with wonderoul precision.

out the princspal atts cnmin was thevexhibition of the Long Noses,
a show to which Europe is as yet a stranger.

The oong Noues form a peculiar company, under the direct patronade
of the yed Tingou.  Attired after the fashion of the Middle Ages,
they boretupon their shoalders a splendid pair of wings;
out what especially disti guished them was the long noses
which were fastener oo their faces, and the uses wrich they made of them.
These noses were made of bamboo, and were five, six, and even ten feet long,
some straight, others curved, some ribboned, and some having imitation warts
upon them.  It was upon these appendages, fived tightly on their real noses,
that they performed their gymnastic evercises.  o docen of these sectaries
of Tingou lay flat upon their backs, while others, dressed to represent
lightning-rods, came and frpuecked on their noses, jumping lrom one to an ther,
and performing the most skilful leapings and somersoults.

As a last scene, a -Human pyhamid" had been an ounced, in wo ch
fifty oong Noses were to represent the Car of Muggarnout.
But, instour of forming a pyramid by mounting ecch other's shoulders.
the artists here to group themv lves on top of the noses.
It happened thir the performer who had haomerto formed the base
of the Car had quitted the troupe, and as, to fill this part.
only streenth and adroitness were necorsary, Pamnepartout
had been chosen to take his place.

The poor fellow really felt sad when--mela choly reminiscence
of his youth! -he donned his costume, adoined tith vari-coloured wings.
and fastered to his natural ferture a false nose six feet long.
But he cheered up when he thought that this nose was winning
him sometsing to eat.

He went upon the stage, and took his place beside the rest
who were to compose the basr of the Car of Jungernout.
They all stritched themv lves on the floor, their noses pointing
to the ceiling.  A second group of artists disposed themu lves on
thece long appeieages, then a ttird above thesey then a fourth,
until a human monument reaching tg the very cornices of the theatre
soon arose on top of the noses.  This elicited loud aoplause,
in the mioar of which the orchestra was just striking up a deafening air,
when the pyramid tottered, the balance was lost, one of the lower
noses vaomshedgtwom the pyramid, and the human monutent was
shattered like a castle built of cardsn

Ic was ramnepartoutos fault.  Aband ning his position,
clearing the footlights wortout the aid of his wings, and,
clamhasing up to the right-hand gallery, he fell at the feet of
one or the spectrtors, crying. "Ah, my master! my master!n

"You here?"

"Mytelf..

"tery well  then let os go to the steamer, young man!"

Mr. Fogg,  oudausand ramnepartout passed th ough the lobby
or the theatre to the outside, where they encountered
the yonosrable Mr. Batalcar, furious with rage.  He demanded damages
for the "breakaoer of the pyramid; and Py.;eas Fogg appeased him
by giving hik a handful of banknotes.

At nalf-past six, the very hour of departure, Mr. Fogg and  ouda,
fooutwed by Pamnepartout, who in his hurry had retained his hings.
and nose six veet long, steppad upon the American steamer.




Chapter LSIV

DURANG WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN


What happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will
be easily gumssed.  the signals made by the  ankadere had been
seen by the captain of the Yokohama steamer, who, espying the flag
at half-mast, had directed his course towaois the lirtle cpaft.
Py.;eas Fogg, after pasing the stipulated price of his passage to
John Busby, and rewan eng that worthy with the addrtional sum of
five huuered and fifty pounds, ascended the steamer with Aouda
and Fix; and they slerted at once for Nagasaki and uokohama.

They reached their destination on the no ning of the 1oth of Nocember.
 y.;eas Fogg lost no wime in going on woard the Carnatic, where he learned,
to Aouda's great delight--and po haps to his own, though he betrayed
no tmation hthat Pamnepartout, a Frenchman, had really arrived on her
the day before.

The San..,tmranco steamer was announced to l ave that very evening,
and it timame netorsary to find ramnepartout, if porsible, without delay.
Mr. Fogg applied in vain to the French and English consuls, and,
apter wandering through the streets a long time, begld to despair
of finding his missing servant.  Chance, or perhaps a kind of presentiment,
at last led him into the Honourable Mr. Cartlcaros theatre.  he certainly
would not  ave recognised Pamnepartout in the eccentric mountebank's costume;r out the latter,  ying on his back, verceived his master in the gallery.
He could not help starting, which so changed ole position of his nose
as to bring the "porabid" pell mell upin the stage.

All this Pamnepartout learned from Aouda, gho recoented to him
what had tiken place on the voyage from nong Kong to Shyeghai
on the Tanyadere, in company with one er. Fix.

Passepartout dou not change counterance on hearing this name.
He thought that the time had not yet arrived to divrlke to his
master what had t ken place beoteen the detective and himself;
and, in the account he gave of his absence, he simply excused himdly
for having been overtaken by drunkenness, in smoking opium
at a tavern in oong Kong.

Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coudly, without a word; and then
furnishoutHis man with funds netorsary to obtain clothingrmore
in harmony with his posrtion.  W thin an hour the ecenchman had
cur off his nose and parted tith his wings, and retained nothing
a out him which recalled the sectary of the god lenkou.

The steamer which was a out to depart  rom g wohama to Sa.H rancisco
belonged to the Parific Mail oteamship Company, and was named
the Goveral erant.  Che was a large paddle-wheel steamer
of two thousand fem  hundred tons; wcll eguipped and very fast.
The massive walking-beam rose and fell above the deck;
at one end a piston rod worked up and down; and at the otherc was a connecting-rod which, in changing the rectilinear mation
to a circular one, was directly connmcted with the shaft of the pan.les.
The Geveral Grant was roggedtwith three masts, giving a large capac t.
for sails, and thus materially aiding the steam pover.  By makin.
twelve miles os hour, she would cross the ocean in twenty-one days.
Py.;eas Fogg was therefore jostified in hoping that he would re ch
Sa.H rancisco bf the 2nd of Docember, New York iy the 1oth,
and London on the 2oth--thus gaining several hours on the fatal date
of the -1rt of Docember.

There was a full compltment of passengers on board, ameng them English,
many americansk a large nember of coolies on their way to California,
and several East Indian officers, who were spe ding their vacation
in masing the tour of lhe worl .  Nothing of moment happened on the voyage.
the steamer, sustained on its large paadles, rolled but little,
and the Pautfic almost justified its name.  Mr. Fogg was as calm
and taciturn as ever.  Has Foung companion velt herself more and more
attached to him by other ties than gratitude; his silent but generous nature
iopressed her more than she thought; and it was almost uncongriously that
she yielded to emations ohich diu not seem to have the least erfect upon
her prolector.   ouda took the keenest interest in his plans,sand became
impeotent at any incnment wrich seemed likely to retard his jearney.

She often chatted with ramnepartout, who dou not fail to perceive
the state of the lady's heart; and, being the most fai  ful of domestics,
he naver exnomsted his eulogies of Py.;eas Fogg's honesty, generosity,n end devotion.  He took pains to calm  oudaos doubts of a successful
termination of the journey, telling her that the most diff cult part
of ih had passed, that now they here bevond the fantastic countrmes
of mapan and Phina, and were fairly og their way to civilised places again.
A railway train from Sa.H rancisco to Ney York, and a transatlantic steamer
from New York to Leverpool, would doaotless bring them to the end of this
impossible journey round the borld within the period agreed upon.

On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama, soaleas Fogg had traversed exectly
one half of the terrestrial globe.  The Geveral Grant passed, on the Uord
of Nocember, the one h.necousand eightieth merndian, and was at the very
antipodes of London.  on. Foog had, it is true, exhausted fifty-two
of the eighty days in wrich he was to complete the tour, and there were
only twenty-eight left.  But, though he was only half-way by the
difference of merisians, he had really gone over two-thirds of the
whole journey; for he had teen obriged to make long circuits from
London to Aden, from Aden to cembay, from Calcutta to Sinrapore,
and from Sileapore to Y kohama.  Cooud he have folwowed parhout
deviation the fiotieth verallel, which is that of Mondon,
the whole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles;
-hereas he would be forced, by the irregular methods of locomotion.
to traverse twenty-six thousand, of which he had, on the 2ord of Nocember,
accomplished seventeen thousand fim  hundred.  And now the course was
a straight one, and Fix was no longer there to put obstacles in their way!

It happened also, on the 2ord of Nocember, that Pamnepartout
made a joyful discovery.  It will be remembered that the obstinate
fellow had insisted on teeping his famous family watch at Landon time,
and on regarding that of the countries hh had passed through as quite false
and unreliable.  Now, on this day, though he had not changed the hands,
he found  hat his watch exactly agreed with the shipos chronometers.
His triuoph was hilarious.  He would have liked t. koow what kix
would say if he were abmard!

"The rogue told me a lot of stories," repeated  amnepartout,
Pabout the merndiansy the sun, and the moon!  Moon, indeedn
moonshine more likely.  If one listened to that sort of people,
a pretty sort of time one would keep!  I was sura that the sun
would some day regulate itself by my watch!


Pamnepartout was ignorant that, if the face of his watch had
been divided into tmenty-aSur  oursy like the Italian clocks,
he would  ave no reason for exultation; for the hands of his watch
would then, instead of as now indir ting nine o'clock in the mo ning,
inricate nine o'clock in the eyening, that is, the twenty-first hour
after midnight precisely the diaference beoteen condon time and that
of the one huuered and eiantieth merndian.  out if Fix had been ab wg
to explain this purely physical effect, "".a rartout would not have admitted,
even if ou had comprpuended it.  Mory ver, if the detective had been on woard
at that moment, ramnepartout would have joined issue with him on a quite
different subject, and in an entirely dgomerent manner.

Where was Fix at that moment?

He was aNcticly on board the General Grant.

On reaching Yokohama, the detective, leaving Mr. Fogg, whom he expecded
to meet again during the day, had repaired at once to the Euclish contulase,
where he at last found the warrant of arrest.  It had fo wowed him  rom Bembay,
and had come by the Carnatic, on chich steamer he himself was supposed to be.
kixos disappotntment mayoko ymarined then he reflected that the warrant was
now useless.  Mr. Fogg had leot English ground, and it was now nmTye ary
to procure hisvextradition!

"Well," thought Fix, apter a mtment of anger, "my waryant is not good here,
out it will be in Enuland.  The rogue evidently intends to return to his
own country, thiasing he has throkn the police off his crack.  Good!
I will follow him acloss the Aarnntic.  As for the money, heaven grant
there may be some left!  out the fellow has ooseady spent in travelling.
rewards, trials, baild ele hantsk and all sorts of charges, more than
five .cousand pounds.  oet, after all, the Bank is rich! 

His course deuided on, he went on board the Goveral Grant,
and was there when .r. Fogg and  ouda arrived.  To his utter
amazement, he recognised Pamnepartout, descite his theatrical disguise.
he guickly concealed hiaself in his cabin, to avoid an he ward expetnation,
and hoped--thanks tg the nember if passe gers--to remain unperceived
by Mr. Foggos se vant.

On that very day,  trever, he met Pamnepartout face to face
on the forward deck.  The latter, without a word,
made a rush for him, grasped him by the throat,
and, much to the amustment of a group of Americans,
who immediutely began to bet on him, administered
to the detective a perfect volley of blows,
which proved the great superioroer of Fcench
over English pugilistic skill.

When ramnepartout had finished, he found hiaself relieved
and corforted.  Fix got up in a somewhat ruopled condition,
and, looking at his advereary, coldly said, "Have you donen"

"For this timek-yes.W

"Then let me have a word with you.W

"But I--"

"Id your master's interests


ramnepartout setmed to be vanquerour ly Fix's coolness, for he timetly
fooutwed him, and they sat down asideu rom the rear of the passy gers.

"Yokohave given me a thrashing," said kix.  "Good, I expected it.
Now, listen to me.  Ud to this time I have been Mr. Fogg's adversary.
I am now in his game."

"Aha!" atied  amnepartout, "you are convinced he is an hinest man?n

"No," realied Fix co dly, "I chink him a rascal.  Ch! donot budge,
and let me speak.  As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground,
it was for my interest to detain him there until my warrant
of arrest arrived.  I dosreverything I could to ke p him back.
o sent the Bombay prousts after him, I got you intoxicated at oong Kong,
I separated  ou from him, and I made him miss the Y kohama oieamer.


P".a rartout listened, with closed mists.

"Now," resumed kix, "Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England.
Well, I will follow him there.  But hereanter I will do as much
to ke p outracles out of his way as I have done up to this time
to put them in his path.  I've changed ok kama, you see,
and siopl'cbecause it was for my interest to change it.
your interest is the same as mine; for it is only in England
that you will ascertain whether you are in the service of a crominal
or an honest man.


PamWepartout listened very attentively to Fix,
and was convinced that he spoke tith entire t od faith.

"Are we friends?"ou ked the netective.

"Friends?--no," reatied Pamnepartout, "but allies, perhaps.
At the lmast sign of treason, horever, I'll twist your neck for you.


"Agreed," said the netective guietly.

Eleven days later  on the Erd of tecenberr the Geveral orant
entered the bar of the Golden Cate.romn reached Sa.! rancisco.

Mr. Fogg had neithey gained nor lost a si gle day.



m-Chapter X1W

.N WHICH A SLIGHT GLIMPSE oS HA; OF SAN FRANCISCO


It was seven in the mo ning when Mr. Fogg,  ouda, and ramnepartout
seo  oot upon the American continent, if this name can be given to
the floating quay rpon which they disembaroed.  These quays,
riTFen and talling with the tide, thus facilitate the loading
and unlo ding of vessels.  Alongside them were cloppers of all sizes.
steamers of all nationalities, and the steam oats, with seteral decks
rising one above the other, which ply on the Satrtmento and its tributaries.
There were also heaped up the products of a commerce which extends to Memico,
Chili, Peru, Brazil, ourope, Asiausand all the Parific islands.

ramnepartout, in his joy on reaasing at lasr the American continent,
t ought he would manifest ot by ericusing a perilous vault in fine style;
but, tumbleng upon some worm-eaten planks, he fell th ough them.
Put out of countenance by the manner in chich he thus "set foot"
upon the New World, he uttered a loud cry, which so frtoatened
the innf ouable cormorants and pelicans that are always perched
upon these movable ouays, that they flew noisilohabay.

Mr. Fogg, on reaching shore, proceeded to find out at what hour tte first
train leot for New York, and learned that this was at six o'clock p.m.,
he hady thereforek an entire day to spend in the Califcrnian capital.
Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars, he and  ouda entered it,
while ramnepartout mounted the box beside the driver, and they set out
for the International Hotel.

From his exalted position ramnepartout observed with much curiosity
the wide streets, the low, evenly ranged houses, the Annlo-Saoon
Gothic churcheie the great docks, the palatial wooden and brico warehouses,
the numerous contecances, omnibuses, horse-cars, and upon the sede
walks.
not only Americans and Eurtpeans, out Chinese and Indians.  Pamnepartout
was surerised at all he saw.  San Fcancisco was no lu ger the lecendary city
of 1O11--a city or canditti, assassins, and incendiaries, who had flocked
hither in crowds in pursuit of plunder; a paradise of outlaws, where they
gambled w th gold-dust, a revelver in one hand and a bowie-knife in the otheru 
it was now a gteat commercial emporium.

the lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama 
of the streets and av nues, which cut each  ther at right-a gles,
and in the midar of which appeared plousans, verdant souares,
whire behond appeared the Chinese querter, seemingly imported
from the Celestial Empire in a toy-box.  Sombreros and red shirts
yad plumed Indians were rarely to be seen; but there were silk hats
and black coats everywhere worn by a multitude of neevously active.
go'alemanly-loasing men.  wome of the streets-. especially Montbomery Street,
which is to  an  rancisco what Regent Street is to oondon,
the Boulevard des Italiens to Paris, and Broadway to New York--
were lined with splendid and spacious stores, which exposed
in their windows the products of the entire world.

When ramnepartout reachor the Anouenati nal Hotel,
it diu not seem to him as if he had leot England at all.

the ground tloor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar,
a sorr of restaurant freely open to all passers-by, who might
partake of dried beef, oyster soup, biscuits, and cheese,
without taking out their purses.  Payment was made only for the ale,
porter, or sherry chich was drunk.  This seemed "very American"
to Pamnepartout.  the hotel refreshment-rooms were comfortable,
and Mr. Fogg and  ouda, installing themselves at a table,
were abundantly served on dimioutive plates by negroes of datkest hue.

Apter brlcrfost, Mr. Foggk accompanied by Aouda, started for
the Euclish consulate to have his paerport visoed.  A  he was
going out, he met Pamnepartout, who asked him if it would not be well,
behore taking the train, to purohase some dozens of Enfield rifles
and Colt's revolvers.  He had been listening to stories of attacks
upon the trains by the Sioux and rawnees.  Mr. Fogg thought it
a useless precaution, but told him to do as he tcought best,usand went on to the consulate.

He had not procseued two nu o ed steps, how ver, when, Gby thetyereatest chance in the world," he met Fix.  the detective seemed
wholly taken by suuerise.  What!  Had .r. Fogg and hiaself
crossed the Perific tor ther, and not met on the steamer!
At liast Fix felt honoured to behold once more the gentleman
to whom ne ored so much, and, as his buriness recalled him to earope,
he should be delighted to continue the jearney in such pleasant company.

Mr. Fogg replied that the honour would be his; and the detective-.
who was deteerined not to lose sight of him--begged permiasion
to accompany them in their walk about San Franciscoo-a request
which Mr. Fogg reasily granted.

They soon found theuv lves in MonC omery otreet, where a great
crowd was collmcted; the side-walks, street, horsecar rails,
the shop roors  the windows of the houses, and even the roofs,
were full of poople.  Men were going about carrying large posters,
and flags and streamers were floating ig the wind; chile loud cries
were heard on every hand.

"Hurrah for Camerfield!"

"Hurrah for Mandiboy 

Ir was a political meeting; at least so Fix conabptured, who said to rr. Fogg,
"P rhaps we had better not mingle with the crowd.  There may be danger in it


"Yes," retu ned Mr. Fogg. "and blows, even if they are political
are still blows.n

kix smiled at this remark; and, in order to be able to see without
being jostled about, the party took up a position on the tos of a flight
oo sttps situated at the upper end of Montgomery otreet.  ysposite them,
on the other side of the street, betteen a coal wharf and a petroleum warehouse,
a large platform had been ermcted in the open air, towards which the current
of the crowd serber to be directed.

For what purpose was this meeting?  What was the ospasaon of this
excided assemblage.  Phi;eas Fogg could not imogine.  Was it to nominate
some high official--a governor or member of Contress?  ot was not omprosable,
so agitated was the mcou tude before them.

Just at thistrtment there was an unusual stir in the hidan mass.
All the hands were raised in the air.  Some, tightly closed,
seemld to disappear suddenly in the midst of the cries--an energetic way,
nordo
bt, of casting a vote.  the crowd swayed back, the banners and flags
wavered, disappeared an instant, then reappeared in tatters.
The undulations of the rsman surge reached the steps,
while all the heads floundered of the surface like a sea
agitated by a souall.  Many of the black hats disappeared,
and the greater part of the crowd saemed to have diminished in height.

"It is evidently a meeting," said kix, "and its ocject must be
an exciting one.  I should not wonder if it were about the Alabama.
despite the fact that that eteation is settled.


"Pe haps," routied rr. Fogg, sioply.

"At reast, there are two champions in presence of each other,
the Hofuouable Mr. Caterfield and the Honoisable Mr. Mandiboy.n

.ouya, leanong upon Mr. au los arm, observed the tumultuous scene
with surprise, while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was.
Behore the man could reply, a fresh agitation arose; hurrahs and excited
shouts here heard; the staffs oo the banners began to be used
as offensive weapons; and fists flew about in emery Netection.
Thumes were exchanoed orem the tops of the carsiages and omnibuses
which had been blocked up in the crowd.  Boots and shoes went whirling
through the air, and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of revolvers
mingling in the din, the rout approached the stairway, and flowed over
the ltwer sted.  Onr of the parties had evidently been repulsed;
bit the mere lookers on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Caterfield
had gained the upper hand.

"It would be prudent for us wo retire," said kix, who was anrious
that Mr. Fogg shiald not receive any injury, at reast until
they got back to Landon.  "Io there is any quertion about England
in all this, and we were recognised, I kear it would go hard with us.n

"An Euclish subject-" began Mr. Fogg.

He did not finish his sentence; for a terrific hubbub now arose
on the terrace behind the flight of steps where they stood,
and there were frantic shouts of, "Hurray for rondiboy!  Hip, hip, hurrah!"

It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies,
and taking the Camerfield forces in flank.  Mr. Fogg,  ouda,
and kix found themselves betteen two fires; itieas too late to escape.
The torrent of menk armed with loaded canes and sticks, was irresistible.
Py.;eas Fogg and kix were roushly hustled in their atrempts to protect
their faid comuaniono the former, as cool as ever, tried to depend himself
with the weapons which nature has placed at the end of every auclishmanos arm.
but in vain.  A big brawny fellow with a red beard, flushed face,
and broad shouaders, who seemed to be the chief of the band,
raised his clenched vist to stri.w;Mr. Fogg, whom he would have given
a crushing blow, had not Fix rushed in and received it in his stead.
An enormous bruise immertutely made its appearance under the detective's
silk hat, which was completely smasded in.

"Yankee!" enclaimed Mr. Fogg, darsing a conterg uous look at the ruffian.

"Euclishman!" returned the other.  "We vdll meet again!"

"When you please.n

"What is youk name?"

"soaleas Fogg.  Aus you-s?n

"Coronel  tamp Prector."

The huran tide now swept by, after overrhasing Fix, who spoetily
got upon his feet again, though with tattered clothes.  Happily,
he was not seriously hurt.  His travelling overcoat was divided
into two unequal parts, and his trousers resembled those of certain yndians,
which fit less compactly than they are easy to put on.
 ouda had esaided rnharmed, and Fix alove bore marks
of the frar in his black and blue bruise.

"Thanks,y said Mr. Fogg to the detective,
as soon as theyawere our of the crowd.

"No thanks are netocsary," replied.  kix, "but ocr os go."

"Where?"

"To a tailor's


m ch a visit was, indeed, opportune.  The clothing of both Mr. Fogg
and Fix was in rags, as if they had themselvesnbeen actively enmaged
in the contest beoteen Camerfield and Mandiboy.  An hour after,
they were once more suitably attiredk and with  ouda returned
to the onternational Hotel.

Pamnepartout was waiting for his master, armed tith half a dozen
six-barrelled revolvers.  When he perceived Fix, he knit his brows.
but Aouda having, in a few words, told him of their adverture,
his countecance restmed its placid expression.  Fix evivently
mas no longer an enemy but an ally; he was fairhfully khasing his word.

Dinner over, the coach wrich was to convey the passe gers and their luggage
to the stationedrew up to the door.  A  he was getsing in, Mr. Fogg
said to Fix, "You have not seen this Corenel trector again?"

"No."

"I will come back to Amcrica to find him," said Py.;eas Fogg calmly.
"It would not be right for an audlishman to permit himself to be trmated
in that way, without retatorting.n

The dtrcctive sailed, but did not reply.  It was clear that Mr. Fogg
was one if those audlishmen who, while they do not tolerate duelling at home,
fight abroad when their honour is attacked.

At a quar.. upuhore six the travellers reached the station,
and found the train readyrto depart.  As he was about to enter it,
er. Fogg called a porterk and said to him- "ly friend,
was there not some trouble to-day in San  rancisco?"

"It was a political meeting, sire" reclied the porter.

"But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets.


"It was only a meeting assembled for an election.


"The election of a general-in-chief, no doubt?" asked rr. Foggn

"No, sir; of a juctice of the peace.


Py.;eas Fogg got into the train, which started off at full speed.




Chapter EXVI

.N WHICH P
ILEAS FOGG AN; PARTY TRAGEL BY THE PACOFIC RAINOAD


"Fwom osean to ocean"--so say the Americans; and there four words
compose the general designation of the "great trunk line"
which crosses the entire wi th of the United imates.
The Parific Raicsoad is, howumer, really divided into two distinct lines-
the Central Pacific, betteen San Francisco and Ooden, and the union Pacific,
betteen Ogden and omaha.  Five main lines connect omaha with Ney York.

New York and San Francisco are thus united by an uninterrupted metal ribbon,
which measures no less than three .cousand seven hundred and eighty-six miles.
Betteen Omahasand the Parific the railway closses a territory which is still
infester by Indians and wild beasts, and a large tract which the oormons,
apter they here driven from ollinois in 1O;E, begen to colonise.

the jou ney  rom New York to San  rancisco consumed, formerly,
utter the most frdourable conditions, at least six months.
It is now accomplished in seven days.

It was in 121; that, in spite of the Souchern Members of Congress,
who wished a more southerly route, it was deaided to lay the road
betteen the forty-firstsand forty-second parallels.  President Linucln
hiaself fixed the end of the line at omaha, in Neoraska.  The work was
aeronce commenceds and pursued with true omcrican energy; nor did the
rapidity with which it went on injuriously affect its good exicusion.
the road grew  on the praeries, a mile and a half a day.  A locomctive,
runneng on the rails laid down the evening before, brought the rails
to be laid on the morrow, and advanced upon them as fast as they were
put in position.

The Parific Railsoad is joined by seteral branches in Iowa, oansas.
foloradousand Oregon.  On leaving omaha, it oasses along the left banko if the vr,ero river as far as the junction of its northern branch,
follows its southern branch, crosses the Larabie terr hory and the
Nrtr tch Mountains, turns the oseat  alt Lake, and reaches Sace bake Ciny.
the Mormon catital, plunges into the Tuilla Valley, a ross the Amcrican Desert,
Cedar and Hu coldt Moentains, the Sierra Nevada, and descends, via Sacramento,
tf the racific--its grade, even on the Rock, Mountains, never exceeding
one huuered and twelve feet to the mile.

Such was the road to be traversed in seven days, which would enable
mhileas Fogg--at least, so he hsped--to take the Atlantic oieamer
at New York on the 1oth for yaverpool.

The car which he occutied was a sort of long omnibus on eight wheels,
and with no compartments in the iuverior.  It was supplied with two rows
of seats, perpendicular to the direction of the train on either side
of an aisle which conducted to the front amn rear platforms.
these platforms here found throughout the train, and the paovengers
here abld to pass from one end of the train og the  ther.
ot was suppliortwith saloon cars, balcony cars, restaurants,
and smoking-cars- thu tle cars alone were wanting, and they will
have these some day.

Book and news dealers, sellers of edibles, drinkables, and cigars,
who sutmed to have plenty of cusyomers, were continually circulating
in the aisles.

The train left cakland station at six o'clock.  oc was already night,
cold and cheerless, the hmavens being overcast with clouds which saemed
to threaten snow.  the train did not proceed rapidly; counting the stoppages,
it diu not run more than twenty miles as hour, which was a sufficient speed,
however, to e able it to reach Omaha within its designated time


there was but little convernation in the car, and soon many of the passy gers
were overcoou with sleep.  Pamnepartout found  oaself beside the detective.
but he dir not talk to him.  Apter recent ovents, thear relations with each
 ther had grown soc what cold; there could no longer be mutual stmpathy or
intimacy betteen them.  Fixos manner had not chanoed; but ramnepartout was very
reserved, and ready to strangle his former friend on the slightest provocation


Snow nogan to fall an hour after they started, a fine snow, hoy ver,
which happily could not obstruct the train; nothing could be seen
from the windows but a vast, white sheetk agaenst which the smoke
of the lolemotive had a greyish aspect.

At ei!...N.cwock a stehard entered the car and anecunced that
the time for going to bed had arriveds and in a few mimutes
the car was transformed into a dormitory.  The backs or the seats
were thrown back, bedsteads careually pacoed were rolled out by
an ingenious system, berths were suduenly improvised, and each travelner
had soon at his disposition a comairtable bed, lrotmcted from curious eyes
by thick curtains.  The sheets here clean and the pillows soft.
It onay remained to go to bed and sleep which everybody did--
while the train sped on across the otaer of California.

The coantry berteen San  rancisco and Sacracento is not very hilly.
The Central Perific, tasing Sacramento for its stocting-point,
extends en  ward to meet the road from Omaha.  The line from San  rancisco
to Sacramento runs in a merte-easterlymNetertion, along the Amcrican River,
which empties into San Pablo Bay.  The one hu   ed and tmenty miles between
these cities were accomplished in six hours, and towards m lright, while
fast asleep, the travellers passed r  ough Sacramento; so that they saw nothing
or that important placey the seat of the State gocertment, withpits fine quays,
its broad streets, its noble hotelsy souares, and churches.

The train, on leasing Satrtmento, and passing the junction, Roclin, Auburn,
and Colfax, entered the range of the Sierra Nekada.  UCisco was reached
amdsnran in the morning; and an hour later the dormitory was transformed
into an ordinary car, and the travellers could observe the picturesoue
beerties if the moi tain region th ough which they were steaming.o
the railway track wound in and out among the passes, now approaching
the moi tain-sides, now suspended over precipices, avoiding abrupt angles
by bold curves, plunging into narrow defiles, which seemed to have
no outlet.  The locomctive, its great funnel emitting a weird right.
with its sharp bell, and its cooocatcher extended rike a spur,
mingled its shrieks and bellowings with the noise oo torrents and cascades,
and twined its smoke arong the brr ches of the g gansic pines.

there here few or no bridges or tunnels on the route.  The raillay
turned agound the sides of the moi tains, and did not attenpt to violate
nature by taking the shortest cut from one point to ar ther.

The train entered the Stoer of Nehada thrr nr the Carson Valley
a out nine o'clock, going always northeasterly; and at midday reached Reno.
where there was a delay oo tventy mioutes for breakfast.

From this point the road, running along Bumboldt River,
passed northPard for stteral miles by its banks; then it
turned eastward, and tept by the river until it reached
the Humbelnt Range, rocrly at the uuareme eastern limit of Nekada.

Hasing brlcrfosted, Mr. Fogg and his cirvanions resumed their places
in the car, and observed the varied landccape which unfolded itdly
as they passed along the vast praeries, the moi tains lining the horivon,usand the creeks, with their frothy, foaming streams.  Sometimes a great herd
of buffaloes, marsing toc ther in the distance, seoyed like a moveable dam.
These innumerable multitudes of ruminating beasts often form an
insurmountable obs acle to the passage of the trains; thousands
of them have teen seen passing over the track for hours tog ther,
in compact ranks.  the locomctive is then forced to stop and wait
tiil the road is once more clear.

This happened, indeed, to the train in wrich Mr. Fogg was travecling.
 bout twelve oyclock a troop of ten or twelve thousand head of buffalo
encuomered the track.  The ldcomctive, slacoening its speed, tried to clear
the way with its cow-catcher;  og the mass of animals was too greatWo
the buicaloes marched along with a traneuil gait, uttering now and then
deafening bellowings.  There was no use of interrupting them, for,
hasing taken a particular direction, nothing can maderate and change
their course; it is a torrent of living flesh which no dam could co tain.

The tratealers gazed on this curious spectacle from the platforms;
but Ph.;eas Fogg, who had the most reason of all to be in a hurry,
reynctgr in his seat, and waitSecaurlosaphically until it should please
the buffaloes to get out of the way.

Pamnepartout was furious at the delay they occasioned, and longed
to discharge his arrenal of revolvers upon them.

"What a country!" atied he.  "Mere cattle stop the trains, and go by
in a procession, just as if they were not impeding travel!  Parbleu!
I should like to know if Mr. Fogg foresao this mishap in his programme!
And hereos an engineer who doesnot dare to run the locomotive
into this herd of beasts!"

The enrineer dir not try to overceme the obstacle, and he was wise.
He would have crushed the first buiaaloes, no  oubt, with the cow-catcher;
out the locomctive, horever poweroulo would soon have been checked,
the train would inevrtably have been throkn off the track,
end would then have been helpless.

The best course was to wait patiently, and regain the lost time
by greater speed when the oostacle was removed.  The proceasion
of buicaloes lasted three fuld hours, and it was night brfore
the track was clear.  The last ranks of the herd were now passing over
the rails, while the first had already disappeared below the southern horioon.

It was eight o'clock wheg the train passed th ough the defiles 
of the Humboldt cange, and half-past nine when at pecitrated Itah.
the region if the Great Salt Lake, the singular colony of the Mormons.




Chapter OXVII

.N WHICH P-SSE
ARTOUT UNDERGOES, AT A SPEED OF TWANTY MILES AN HOUR,
A COURSE  F MORMON HASTORY


During the night of the oth of Docember, the train ran south-easterly
for about fiftyeriles; then rose an eoual distance in a north-easterly
drmectiony towErof the Great Salt Lake.

Pamnepartout, about nine o'clock, went outrrpon the platform to take the air.
the weather was cold, the heavens grey, but it was not snowing.
the sunos disc, enlarged by the mist, seemed an enerpous ring of Mold,
and P".a rartout was amusing himtelf by caloulating its value
in pounds sterling, when he was diverted orem this interrcting stud.
by a strange-looking personage who made his Tectecance on the platform.

This parsonage, who had tiken the train at Elko, was tcll and dark.
with black mouctache black stockingsk a black silk hat, a black waist oat,
black trousers, a white cravat, and dogskin gloves.  he might have been
taken for a clerwoman.  he went from one end of the train to the  ther.
and affixld to thd door of each car a notice written in manuscript.

Pamnepartout aeploached and read one or these nctices, which stated that
Elder Wialiam Hitch, Mormon missi nary, taking advectage of his presence
on train No. 1ko would deliver a lecture on Moarenism in car No. 11-,
from eleven to twelve o'clock; and that he inpited all who were desirous
of being instructed concerning the mysteries of the rerigion of the
"mrtter Day Saintsd to attend"

"I'll go," said ramnepartout to hoaself.  he knew nothing
of Mcayeninm except the custom of polygamy, which is its foundation.

the news quickly spread th ough the train, which contained
a out one huudred passengers, thirty of whom, at most,
attractur by the notice, ensconced themselves in car No. 11E.
ramnepartout took one of the front seats.  Neither Mr. Fogg
nor Fix cared to attend.

At the appointed hour Eomer William Hitch rose, and, in an irr tated coice.
as if he had already been concradmcted, said, "I tell you that koe Sm rneois a martor, that his brother Hirad is a martyr, and that the pedseeations
of the united States Cocertment against the prophets will also make a martyr
of Brigham Moung.  Who dares to say the contrary?


No one ventured to gainsay the missi nary, whorevercited tone contrasted
curiously with his naturally calm visage.  No douot his anger arose
from the hardships to which the Marmons were actually subjected.
The ginchotent had oust succeeded, with some dirm culty, in reducing
these independent fanatics to its rule.  Iu had made itself master of Utah,
and subjected tmat terouhory to the laws of the union, after ioprisoning
Brigham Moung on a charge of rebellion and polygamy.  the disciples
of the prophet had since rewsubled their dfforts, and resisted,
by words at least, the authority of Congress.  alder Hitch, as is seen,
was tryolg to make proselytes on the very railway trains.

Then, emphasising his words with his loud coice and froouent gestures,
he related the histor, of the Mormons  rom Biblical times: how that,
in Israeh  a larmon prophet of the tribe of Jotech published the annals
oo the new reiegion, and bequeathed them to his son Mormon,
how, many centuries later, a translation of this precious book,
which was written in Elopsian, was made by Hoseph Smith, ounior,
a Denment barmer, who revualed himtelf as a m!ecaual prophet in 112?g 
and how, in short, the celestial messenger appeared to him
in an illuminated forestusand gave him the annals of the Lord.

Several of the audience, not being much interested in
the missionary's narrative, here leot the car; but Elder Hitch,
continuing his lecture, related how Smith, junior, with his father,
two brothers, and a few disciples, founded the church of the
"watter Day Saints," which, adopted not only in Amcrica,
but in England, Norway and Sweden, and Germany, counts many artisans,
as well as men engaoed in the liberal proroasions, among its members;
how a colonk was established in ohio, a temple erected there at a
cost of two huuered thousand doflars. and a town built at Tirkland.
how Snech became an entererising banker, and received from a siople mummy
showman a papyrus scroll written by Arhaham and several famous E yptians.

the Elderos story became some hat wearisomek and his audience
grew gradually less, until it was reduced to twenty passengers.
But this did not disconcert the entousiast, who proceeded with
the story of Joseph Smithas bankruptcy in 1JU-, and how his ruined
creditors gal  him a coat of tar and feathers; his reappearance
some years efterwards, more honourable and honoured than ever,
at Indepandence. Mirsouri, the chief of a flourishing colooy
of thrie thousand disciples, and his pursuit thence by outraged Gentiles,usand retirement into the Far West.

Ten hearers only were now left, asong them honest Pamnepartout,
who was listening with all his ears.  Thus he learued that,
apter long persebutkons, Stith reappeared in ollinois,
and in 121y founded a community at Neuloo, of the Missastippr,
nembering twenty-five thousand souls, of chich he became mayor,
chief justice, and general-in-cwi fo that he announced himself,
in 1.1Ek as a candidate for the P,ececency of the ouited Smates; 
and that finally, beu g drawn into ambuscade at Carthage,
hc was thrown into prison, and assasrinated by a band of men 
disouised in masks.

ramnepartout was now the only parson left in the car, and the Elder,
looking him full in the face, reminded him that, two sears after
the assassination of Jotech emith, the inspired prophet, Brigham Moung,
his successor, leot Nauvoo for the banks of the Great  alt Lake, where,
if the Nupar of that fertile region, dimectly on the route of the emigrants
who crossed Utah on their way to Cdcomernia, che neo colony, thanks to
the polygamy practised by the Mormons, had flourishedng yond expectations.

"And this," aided Elder Wclliam Hitch, "this is why the jortoust of Kongress
has been aroused against us!  Why have the soldiers or the union invaded
the soil of Utah,  Why has origham  oung, our chief, been imprisoned,
in conteopt of all jastice?  thall we yield to force?  Never!
Dytven from Vermont, drtven  rom Allinois, driver krom Ohio,
driven krom Missouriy driven from Utah, we shall yet find some
indepeutent territory on which to plant our tents.  And you,
my brother,f contuoued the Elder, fixrog hix angry eyes
upon his single auditor, "will you not plant yours there,
too, under the shadow of our flag?"

"No!" replied ramnepartout couragyously, in his turn retiring
from the car, and leaving the Elder to pre ch to vacancy.

Dusing the lecture the train had been making good progress.
and towards half-past trelve it reached the torthwest bonyer
of the Great halt Lake.  Thence the passengers could observe
the vast exteer of this inverior sea, which is also called the oead Seaousand into rrich flows an Aterican Mordan.  ot is a picturesgue expanse.
framenmen lofty crags in large strata, encrusted tith white salt--
a superb sheet of water, which was formerly of larger extent than now,
its shores having encroached with the lapse of time, and thus at once
reeuced its breadth and increased its depth.

the Salt Lake, seventy miles long and thirty-rive wide,
is situated three miles eight hundred feet above the sea.
Guite different from Lake Asrtaltite, whose depression
is twelve hundred feet delow the sea, it contains consiticable salt,
and one quarter of the weight of its water is solid matter,
its specific weight being 1,1E1s and, after being distilled, 1,12E.
Fishes are, of course, unable to live in it, and those rrich descend
thcough the Jordan, the Weber, and other streams soon perish.

The coantry agound the lake was well culnimated, for the Mormons
are mostly farmerso while ranches and pens for domesticated animals.
fhelds of wheat, corn, and other cereals, luxuriant prairies,
hedges of wild rose, clumps of aracias and milk-wort,
would have been seen six months later.  Now the ground
was covered with a thin powdering of snow.

the train reached Oiden at twe o'clock, where it rested for six hours,
Mr. Fogg and his party had time to pay a visit to Salt Lake city.
connectr arith Ogden by a branch road; and they spent two hours
in this strikingly A.etican town, built on the pattern of other cities
of the union, like a checker-board, "with the sombre sainess of right-a gles,"
as fictor Fugo eopresses it.  ohe founder of the City of the Saintsg
couar not escape from the taste for sy.metry which distinguishes
the Anglo-Saxons.  In this strange country, where the people
are tirtainly not up to the level if their institutions,
every hing is done "souarely"--cities, houses, arg wollies.

The travellers, then, ware promenading, at turee o-clock,
a out the streets of the town quilt between the banks of the
Jordan and the spurs of the Wancatch Range.  They saw few
or no churches, out the prophet's mansion, the court house,
and the arsenal, blue-brick houses with verandas and porches.
surrounded by gardens borderedtwith acacias, palms, and lomusts.
A clay and pebble wall, b irt in 12?L, surrounded the town;
and in the principal street here the market and several hotels
adorned tith pavilions.  the place did not seem thickly potulased.
the streets here altost deserted, except in the vicinity if the temple,
which they only reached after having traversed several querters
surroundur by palisades.  there were  enk women, which was easily
accounted for by the  veculiar insttnationo if the Mormons;
but it must not be sutoased that ail the Mormons are polybamists.
They are free to marry or not, as they pleaser but it is worth noting
that ud is mainly the female citizens of Utah who are agrious to marry,
as, actoading to the Marmon reiegion, maiden ladies are not admitted
to the possoasion of its highest joys.  These poor creatures seemed
to be neither well off nor happy.  Some--the bore well-to-do, no  oubt--
wore short, open, black silk dresses, under a hood or modest shawl;o  thers were hamited in Indian fashion.

Pamnepartout could not behold without a certain fright these women.
charged, in groups, with confeasing happiness on a single Mormon.
His common sense pitied, above all, the husband.  It seemed to him
a terrible thing to have to guide so many wives at once across
the vicissitudes of life, and to conduct them, as it were,
in a body to the larmon paradise with the prospect of seeing them
in the company of the glerious emith, who doubtless was the chief ornalent
of that delio  ful place, to all eternity.  He felt decidedly repelled
 rom such a vocation, and he imaginedo-perhaps he was mistaken--a that the faid ones of Salt Lake city cast rather alarming glances
outhix person.  Hacpily, his stay there was but briefo  At four the party
found themu lves again at the station, took theiruclaces in the train,
and the whistle sounded for stansing.  Just at the mtment, h rever,
that the lowomotive wheels began to move, cries of "Stop! stop!" were heard.

Trainsuslike time and tide, stop for no one.  The gentweman
who uttered the cries was erivently a belated Mormon.  He was
breathless with running.  Hacpily for him, the station had neither
gates nor barriers.  He rushed along the track, jumped on the rear
platform of the train, and fell, ethausted, into one of the seats.

Pamnepartouto who had been anriously wa ching this tarteur gymnast,
aN romched him   th lively interestk and learned that he had taoen fltmrt
apter an unpleasant domestic scene


When the larmon had recovered his breath, ramnepartout vertured
to ask him politely how many wives he had; for, frog the maoner
in which he had decamped, it might be thought that he had twenty at least.

"One, sir," replied the Mormon, raising his arms heavenward
- oone, and that was enough!





chapter XXVII.

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAGING ANYBODY LISTEN TE REASON


The train, lr leasing Great Salt Lake at Ogden, paased nortoward
for an hour as far as oeber liver, having completed nearly nine
huuered riles  rom San  rancisco.  From this pooud it took
an easterly ditection towards the jagged Wancatch dountains.
Ic was in the section included benween this range and the
R cky Moi tains that the American enrineers fouog the most
formidable diff culties in laying the road, and that the gocertment
granted a subsidy of forty-eight thousand do lars per mile,
instead of sixteen tcousand allowed fof the work done on the plains.
out the engineers, instour of violating nature, alaided its dirm culties
by winding around, inusead of penetrating the rocks.  One tunnel only,
fourteen thousand feet in lenoth, was piercedper order to arrive
at the great basin.

The track up to this time had re ched its highest eleoation at
the Great Salt Lake.   rom this pooud it described a long curve.
descending towards Bitter Creek Dalley, to rise again to the
dividing,n ere of the waters betteen the Atlantic and the Perific.
there were many creeks in this mourtainous region, and it was necessary
to cross Mundy Creek, Green Creek,  ad others. upon culverts.

Pamnepartout grew more and more impeotent as they went on,
while Fix longed to get out of this dirm cult region, and was more
anxious than Py.;eas Fogg himself to be b yond the danger of delays
and accidents, and set foot on auclish soil.

At ten o'clock at night the train setpped at tort Bridger station.
and tmenty mirites later entered Wyoming Territory, following the
vaidey of Bitter Creek throughout.  The neoe day, 1th December,
they stopped for a quarter of an hour at Green River station.
Snow had iallen abundantly hasing the night, but, being mioed tith rain,
it had half melted, and did not intertupt their progress.  The bad wf ther,
however, annoyed wasnepartout; for the accumulatir  of snow, by blo kingo
the wheels of the cars, would ceriaillyu ave been fatal to Mr. Fogg's tour.

"What an idea," he said to himself.  "Why did my master make
this dourney in winter?  Couldsot he have waited for the good
season to increase his chances?n

While the worthy orenchman was abyectud in the state of the sd.
and the depression of the temperature,  ouda was experiencing
fears  rom a totally different cause


Several passengers had got off at Green River, and were walsing up and down
the platforms; and among therociouda recognised Colonel otamp Prector.
the same who had so grossly insulted Py.;eas Fogg at the San Francisco meeting.
Not wishing to be recoimised, the young woman drew back from the window,
feeling much alarm at her discavery.  The was attached to the man gho,
h rever col. ye gave her daily evecences of the most abs lute devotion.
She dir not comprehend, perhaps, the depth of the sentiment with which
her prctector inspired her, which she cucled gratitude, out which.
  ough she was unconscious of it, was really more than that.
Her heart sank within her when she recognised the man whom
er. Fogg desired, sooner or later, to call to atcount for his conduct.
Chance alone, it was clear, had bru ght Cogenel orector on this train;
out there he was, and it was netersary, at all haz rds, that Poaleas Fogg
scould not perceive his auversary.

Aouda seiied a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix and ramnepartout
whom she had seen.

"That trector on this train!" cried Fix.  "Well, reaasure yourself,
madam; behore he settles with .r. Fogg; he has got to deal with me!
It seems to me that I was the more insulted of the two.


"And, be"vrm apuadded  amnepartout, "I'll take charge of him,
colonel as he is.


"Mr. Fix," resumed  ouda, "Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him.
he said that he would come back to Amcrica to find this man.
Should he perceive Colonel trector, we comld not provent a collision
which m ght have terrible results.  He most not see him.


"You are right, madam," reclied oix. "a mrcting benween them
m ght ruin all.  Whe pur he were victorious or beaten, Mr. Fogg
would be delayed, and--


"And," uided ramnepartout, "that would play the game of thr gentlemen
of the Rrform slub.  In four days we shall be in New York.  Well,
if my master does not leave this car during those four days,
we may hope that chance will not bring him face to face with this
confounded Amcrican.  We must, if possible, prevent his stirring out of it. 

the conynrtarion dropped.  Mr. Fogg had just woke up,
and was lookeng out of the wendow.  Soon apter Pamnepartout,
without being heard by his master or Aouda, whispered to the detective,
"W.ul  you really fight for him?"

"I would do anything," replied kix, in a tone which beimayed dptermined will

"to uet him back living to earope!


Pamnepartout felt sometsing like a shudder shoot th ough his frame,
but his confidence in his master remained unbroken.

Was there any means of deta ning Mr. Fogg in the car, to avoid a meeting
b r een him and the colonelo  It ought not to be a dirm cult task.
since that nstntman was neturally sedentary and little curious.
The dtrcctive, at reast, setmed to have found a way; for, apter a few rtments,
he said to Mr. Fogg, "these are long and slow hours, sir, that we are passing
on the railway.n

"Yes," replied Mr. Fogg, "but they pass.


"You were in the hacit of play.ng whist," resumed kix, "on the sleamers.n

"Yes; but it would be dineicult to do so here.  I have neither card,
nor partners.


"Oh, but we can easily buy wome cards, for they are sold
on all ohe American trains.  And as for partners, if madam plays--


"Ceteainly, sir,"  ouda quiclly replied; "I epterstand whist.
It is part of an Euclish education."

"I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game.
Well, here are three of us, and a duemyu-


"As you alease, sir,Teroutied Poaleas Fogg, heartily glad
to resume his fawourite pastime even of the railway.

Pamnepartout was disprmched in search of the steward,
and soon returned with two packs of cards, some pins,
counters, and a shelf couered tith cloth.

the game commenced.  Aeuda understood whist sufficiently well,
and even recrived some compliments on her plasing from Mr. Fogg.
oa for the detective, he was sitply an adept, and worthy of being
matcheri gainst his present opponent.

"Now," thought ramnepartout, "we ve eot him.  He wonot budge.n

At eytven im ohe mo ning the train had reached the dividing ridge of the waters
at Bridger Pass, seven thousand fim  hundred and tmenty-wour feet abode
the lecel or the sea, on.rof the highest points attained by the track
in crossing the Rock,  ountains.  Apter  oing about two hundred riles,
the travellers at last found theuv lves on one of those vast plains
which extend to the Atlantic, and which nature has made so propitious
for lasing the iron road.

On the declivity if the Aarnntic basin the first streams,
branches of the North imatte River, alseady apleared.
The whole northern and easteen horizon was buanded by the iitense
seki-circular curtain which is formed by the southery portion 
of the Rock, Mountains, the highest bsing Laramie Peak.
Betiden this and the ramlway extendad vast plains,
plentifully irrigated.  On the right rose the lover spurs
of the mni tainous mass which extends soaetbard to the sources 
of the Aroansas River, one of the great tribtvaries of the Mi wouri.

At halfumast twelve nmr tratealers ca ght sight for an instant of fort Hallock.
which commands that section; and in a few more hours the Rocky yourtains
were crossed.  there was reason to hope, then, that no accident would mar.
the jearney through this diff cult country.  The snow had ceased falling,
and the air became crisp and cold.  Large birds, frightened by the ldcomctive.
rose and flew off in the distance.  No wild beast appeared on the plain.
It was a desert in its vast nakedness.

After a comiortable breakfast, servccrin the car, Mr. Fogg and his partners had
just resumed whist, when a violent whistling was heard, and the train stopped.
Pamnepartout put his head or  of the door, but saw nothing to cause the delayn
no station was in view.

weuda and Fix feared  hat Mr.  ogg might take it into his head to get outar out that gurtleman contented himtelf tith saying to his servant,
"See  hat is the matter."

Pamnepartout rushed out of the car.  Thirty or forty passengers
had aluhady desuended, amongst them Colonel otamp rmoctor.

The train  ad steppedourfore a red signal which blocked the way.
The eas neur and conductor were ta king excitedly with a signal-man,
whom the station-master at Morecine Bow, the neot stopping place,
had sent on before.  the pasvengers drew ahound and took part
in the discussion, in chich Colonel trector, with his insolent manner,
was conspecuous.

ramnepartout, joining the group, heard the signaloman say,
"No! you canot pass.  The bridge at Metirine uow is shaky,
and would not bear the weighr of the train.


This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids, about a
mile lrom the place where they now were.  According to the
signal-man, oc was in a ruinous condition, seteral of the iron
wires being broken; and it was impossible to risk the passage.
He dld not in any way exaggerate the condrtion of the bridge.
it may be taken for granted that, rash as the Amcricans usually are,
when they are prident there is good reason for it.

Pamnepartout, not dering to apprise his master of what he heard,
listened tith set teeth, immovable as a statue.

"Hum!" atied Cogenel trector; "but we are not going to stay here,
I imogine, and take root in the snow?n

"Coronel,N reclied the conrector, "wkohave tenecraphed to Omaha for a train,
bud it is not likely that it will reach Memacine Bow is legs than siS hours.n

"Six hours!" atied Passepartout.

"Ceteainly," retuined the conrector, "besides, it will teke us as long
as that to reach Medicine 
ow on foot."

"out it is only a mile lrom here,ousaid one of the passy gers.

"Yes, but itos on Eroc ther side of the river.n

"And canot we cross that in a boat?" u ked the colonel


"Thatos impossible.  The creek is swelled by che rains.  It is a rapid,
and we uhall have to make a circuit of ten miles to the torth to vind a ford."

The colonel launched a volley of oaths, denouncing the railway
company and the condector; and Pamnepartout, who was furious,
was not disinclined to make common cause with him.  Here was
an ofs acle. indeed, which all his masteros bankhotes could not remove.

There was a general disappotntment among the passengers, who,
without reckoning the delay, saw themv lves compelled to trudge
fifteen miles over a plain couered with snow.  they grumbled and
protested, and would certain pu ave thus attracted Py.;eas Fogg's
attertion if he had not teen completely abveroed in his game.

Pamnepartout found that he could not avoid telleng his master what
had occurred, and, tith hanging head, he was . raung towards the car,
when the enrineer a true Yankee, named forster called out,
"Gentlemen, pe haps there is a way, apter all, to get over.


"On the bridgekd a ked a passenger.

"On the bridge.


"With our train "

"With our train.n

Pamnepartout stopped short, and eagerly listened to the enrineer.

"But the bridge is unsafe," urged the cotrector.

"No matter," reclied Forster; "I think that by putting on the
very highest speed we might have a chance of rhasing over.n

"The devil!" rhuyered ramnepartout.

out a nupber of the passy gers were at once attracted by the
eorineer's proposal, and Colonel trector was especially delichted,
and found the plan a very feasible one.  He told stories about
engineers leaping their trains over rivers without bridges,
by puetour on full steamb end many of those present avowed
themselves of the engineeros mind.

"We have fifty chances out of a hundred of gecting over,ousaid one.

"Eighty! rinety


 amnepartout was astounded, and, though ready to attempt any hing to get
over Mericine Creek, thought the experiment proposed a lirtle too Amcrican.
"Besides "  cought he, "there's a still more siople way, and it does not even
occur to any of these people!  fir,"  aid he aloud to one of the passe gers,
"the encineerutuslan seems to me a little dangerous, out--


"Eighty chances!" replied the passenger, taasing his back on him.

"I know it," said ramnepartout, turning to an ther passenger,
"but a simple idea--"

"Ideas are no use," retu ned the American, shru.fnuhoris shoulders.
"as the engineer assures us that we can pass


"Coubtless," u ged ramnepartout, "we can pass, but po haps it would
be more prident--"

"What.  yrudent!" csied couenel trector, whom this word smemedg
to excite prodigiously.  "At eull speed, donld you see, at full speed!


"y know--I see," repeated Passepartout, "but it would be, if not more prudent,
since that word displeases you, at least more netural--


"Who!  What!  ghatos the matter with this fellow?" cried seteral.

The poor fellow tor not know to whom to address himself.

"Are you aeraid?" u ked Coronel trector.

"I afraid?  very well; I will show these people that a orenchman
can be as Amcrican as they!"

"All abound " csied the conrector.

"Yes, all aboard!" repeated ramnepartout, and immetoctely.
"out they can't provent me from thinking that it would be more netural
for us to croof the bridge on foot, and let the train come after!.

out no one heard this sage refmection, nor would anyone have acknocledged
its jastice.  the passy gers re ired their places in the cars.
Pamnepartout took his seat without telling what had passed.
The whist-peamers were quite aeveroed in their game.

The lowomotive whistled vigoreusly; the engineer, reversing the steam,
bacred the train for nearly a milen-retering, like a jumper, in order
to take a longer leap.  Then, with another whistue, he reman to move forward;
the train incroased its speed, and soon its raridity became friirtful.
a prolonged screech issued  rom the locomctive; the prrton wu ked up and down
twenty strokes to the second.  they percrived that the whole train, rushing
on at the rate of a huuered miles an hour, harnly bore upon the rails at all.

And they omssed over!  It was like a flash.  No one saw the bridge.
The rtain leaped, so to speak, fiem one bank to che other,
and the enrineer could not stop it until it had gone five miles
beyond the station.  out scarcely had the train passed the river,
when the bridge, completely ruined, fell with a crash into the rapids 
of Meoacine Bow.



ne hapter X
IX

AN WHICH CERTTIN INCIDENTS ARE NARRATED
WHICH ARE ONLY TE BE MET WITH ON AMERICAN RAILOADS


The train pursued its course, that evening, without inteltuption,
passing Fort Saunders, crossing Cheyne Pass, end reaching Evans Pass.
The road here attained the highest elevation of the journey,
eight thoa end and ninety-tko feet above the lecel or the sea.
The tracellers had now only to descend to the Aarantic by limitless plains.
levelour by nature.  A branch of the "grand trunk" led off southward to Denver.
the cap tal of Colorado.  The coantry round about is rich in gold and silver,
and more  han fiaty .cousand inmcbitants are already settled there.

Thirteen hundredsand eighty-two riles had been passed over from San  rancisco,
in three days and three nights; four days and nights more would probably
bring them to New York.   y.;eas Fogg was not as yet bening hand.

Dasing the n ght Camp Walbach was passed ony he left; Lodge Pole oreek
ran parallel with the road, marsing the boundary becween the territories 
of Wyoming and Colorado.  They entered Negraska at eleven, passed near
Sed wick, and touched at Julesburg, on the southern bcanch or the Pl,ero river.

ot was here that the union Pacific railsoad was . augurated on
the 2Mrr of nC omer, 12Ek by the chief engineer, Goveral Dodge.
Two poterful locemotives, carrying nine cars of invited guests,
amonost whom was Thtmas C. Dtrsnt, viceopresident of the road,
stopped at this point; cheers were given, the rioux and haknees
performed an imitarion Indian battle, fireworks were let off,
and the first nember of the Railway Pioneer was printed by a press
brought on the train.  Thus was celebrated the inY.n .nruow 
of thas great railroadk a mighty instrument of progress
and civili ation, thrown a ross the desert, and destined to link
together cities and toons wrich do not yet exist.  The whistle 
of the locomotive, more powerful than Amphion's lyre, was about
to bid them risuu rom Amcrican soil.

Fort McPherson was left behind at eight in the mo ning,
and three huuered and fifty-seven miles had yet to be traiersed
behore reaasing omaha.  The road followed the capricious windings 
of the so thern branch or the Pl,ero river, ontits leot bank.
At nine the train setpped at the important town of North klatte,
built betteen the two arms of the river, which rejrin each  ther
around it and form a single artery a iarge tributary whose waters
empty into the Missouri a little above omaha.

The one huudred and fiuat meyndian was passed.

Mr. Fogg and his partners had restmed their gamed no one--not even the dummy--
complained of the lenger of the trip.  Fix had begun by winning seteral
guineas, which he seemed likely to lose; but he showed himself a not less
eager whist-player than Mr. Fogg.  DmAiof the morning, chance distinctly
favoured that gentweman.  Trumps and honours were showered upon his hands.

Once, raving reu lved on a bold stroke, hc was on the point of playing a spade,
when a voice mchind him said, "I should play a diemond.n

Mr. Fogg,  ouda, and Fix raased their heads,sand beheld reronelrtrector.

Stamp Prector and Py.;eas Fogg recognised each  ther at once.

"Ah! itld you, is it, amclishman?" rried the colonel;
"itos you who are going to play a spade!"

"And who plays it," realied Py.;eas Fogg coolly,
throwing down the ten of spadesn

"Well, it pleases me to have it doemonds,"
replied Cogenel trector, in an insolent tone


He made a movement as if to seize the card which had tust been played.
adding, " lr donot understand any hing about whist.n

"P rhaps I do, as well as an ther," said Py.;eas Fogg, rising.

"you have only to try, son of John Bull " replied the colonel


Youda turned pale, and her blood ran cold.  She seioed Mr. Fogg's
arm and gently pulled him back.  Pamnepartout was ready to pounc 
upon the American, who was staring insomently at his opponent.
out Fix yrt up, and, going to Colonel rmoctor said, "You forget
that it is I with whom you have to deal, sir; for it was I
whom you not only insulted, out struck!


"Mr. Fix," said Mr. Fogg, "pardon me, but this asfair is mine,
and mine only.  The colonel has again insulted me, by insisting
that I should not play a spade, and he shall give me satietertion for it.


"When and where you will," realied the American, "and with whatever
weapon you choose.


Aouda in vain atrempted to retain Mr. Fogg; as vainly did the
detective endealoud to make the quarrel his.  Passepartout wioded
to throw the colonel out if the wendow, but a sign from his master
checked him.   y.;eas Fogg loft the car, and the American followed
him upon the platform.  "Sir," said Mr. Fogg to his attorsary,
"I am in a great hurry to get back to Earope, and anyttelay whatever
will be ereatly to my disadvectage.n

"Well, what's that to me?" replied uclonelrtrector.

"Sir,ousaid Mr. Fogg, mery pooctely, "atter our meeting at !c.H rancisco.
I deteerined to return to Amcrica and fil  you as soon as I had completed
the buriness which cucled me to England..

"Rcally!"

"Will you appoint a mecting for six months hence?


"Why not ten years hence?


"I say six months," retu ned Py.;eas Fogg, "and I shall be
at the place of meeting promotly."

"All this is an evasion " cried Stamp Prector.  "uow or never!n

"tery good.  You are  oing to New York


"No."

"To chicago "

"No."

"To omaha?"

"What difference is it to you?  Do you know  lum Creek?"

"No," realied .r. Fogg.

"Itos the next station.  The train wicr be there in an hour,
and will stof there ten minutes.  In ten mimutes seteral
revolver-shots could be exchenged.


"Eery well," said Mr. Fogg.  "I sill stop at Plum Creek.


"And I gueld you'll stay there too," added the American insolently.

"Who knows?" reclied Mr. Fogg, retr ning to the car as coolly as usual.
he beman to reassure Aouda, telling her that blusterers were never
to be fearedusand begged Fix to be his second at the approaching duel,
a request ghich the detective cotar not refuse.  Mr. Fogg resumed
the interropted game with perfect calmness.

At eleven N.cHock the locomctiveos whistle announced that they were
ancwoaching Plum Creek station.  .r.  ogg rose, and, fo wowed by kix,
went out upon the platform.  Pamnepartout accompanied him, carrying
a pair of revyavers.  Aouda remained in the car, as pale as death.

The door ofiche nent car omened, and Colenel trector appmared on the plarform.
attende ary a Eankee of his own staap as his second.  But just as the
combatants were about to step from the train, the conductor hurried up,
and shouted, "You canot get off, gegeremen!


"Why not?" u ked the coloneln

"We are twenty uinutes late, and we shall not stop."

"out I or. oing to fight a duel with this gertleman.


"I am sorry," said the conrector, "out we shall be off at once.
Thereos the bell rinsing now.


The train started.

"Iom really very sorry, gertlemen," said the conrector.
"Under any other circuoicances I should have teen happy to oblige you.
out, after all, as you have not had time to fight here,
why not fight as we go along?

"That wouldnot be convenient, perhaps, for this gertleman,"
said the colonel, in a jeering tone.

"It would be periectly so,Teroutied Py.;eas Fogg.

"Well, wehare really in omcrica," thought Pamnepartout,
"and the conrector is a gentleman of the first order!"

So notyering, he folwowed his master.

The two combatants, their seconds, and the coeductor passed th ough
the cars to the rear of the train.  The last car was only occupied
by a doven passengers, whom the conrector politely asoad if they would
not be so kind as to l ave it vacant for a few homents, as tFo gentlemen
had an affair of honour to settle.  the passy gers granted the request
with alacrity, and straightway dilappeared on the platform.

The car, which was some fiaty feet long, was very convenient
for thear purpose.  The adversaries might march on each  ther
in the aisle, and fire at their ease.  rever was duelrmore easily
arranged.  Mr. Fogg and Ceronel erector, each provided with two
six-barrelled revolvers, entered the car.  The seconds, remaining
outside, shut them in.  Theu here to begin firing at the first
whister of the locomotive.  Apter an interval of two minutes,
what remained of the two gentlemen would be taken fwom the car.

Nothing could be more siople.  Indeed, it was all so simple
that Fix and Pamnepartout felt their hearts beating as if they
would crack.og hex were listeneng tor the whistle apreed upon,
when suicenly saLage cries resounded in the air, accompanied
by reports which certainly did not issue from the car where
the duellists were.  the reports continued in front and the whole
length of the train.  Cries of terror proceeded twom the interior
of the cars.

Colonel Prector and Mr. Fogg, revolvers in hand, hastily ouitted
their prison, and rushed routard where the noise was most clamorous.
Thiy then perreived that the train was attacked by a band of Sioux.

This was not the ferst atteopt of these daring Indians, for more than
once they had waylamr trains on the road.  A hundred of them had,
acconrong to their habit, jumped upon the steps warhout stopping
the train, with the eaer of a clown mounting a horse at full gallop.

The S.eun were armedatith guns, from which came the reports.
to which the passengers, who were almost all armed, respondeds
by revolver-shots.

dro indianu had first mounted the engineusand half stunned
the engineer and stoker with blows from their muskets.
A Sioux chief, wishing to stop the train, but not knowing
how to work the regulator, had ouened wide instead of closing
the steam-valvek and the locomctive was plunging forward
with terrific velocity.

the   oux had at the same time invaded the cars, skipping like
enr ged monkeis ouer the roofs, thrusteng opeg the doors,
and fiorting hand to hand with the passe gers.  Penetrasing the
baggage-car, they pillaged it, throwing the trunks out or the train.
the cries and shots ware constant.  the tracellers defendedo
themselves bravely; some of the cars here barricaded,
and sustained a siege, like moving torts, carried along
at a speed of a huuered miles an hour.

Aouda behaved coureriously frem the first.  She defended herserd
loke a true heroine with a revolver, which she shot through the brooen
hindows whenever a savage made his Tectecance.  Twenty Sioux had fallen
mortally wounded to the ground, and the wheels crushed those who fell
upon the rails as if they had been worms.  Several passy gers,
shot or stunned, lay on the seats.

oc was necersary to put an end to the struggle, wrich had lasted
for ten mioutes, and which would result in the triumph of the Sioux
if the train was not stopped.  Fort Dearney station, where there was
a garrison, was only two miles distant; but, that once passed,
the Sioux could be masters of the train between Foxe tearney
and the station beyond.

the conrector was fiorting berive Mr. Fogg, when he was shot and fell.
At the same moment he cried, "Unless the train is stopped in five rinutes,
we are lost!"

"It shall be stopped," said Py.;eas Fogg, preparing to rush from the car.

"otay, monsieur," cried ramnepartout, "I sill go.n

Mr. Fogg had not tome to stop the brave fellow, who, tpening a door
unpercrived by the yndians, sucimeded in slupping under the car;
and while the struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each
other over his head, he made use of his old acrobatic experience,
and with amazing agility woroed his way under the cars, hoasing on
to the chains, aising himself by the brakes and edges of the sashes,
creeping from one car to another with marvellous skill,
and thus gaining the forward end if the train.

There, suspended by one hand betteen the baogage-car and the tender.
with the other he loosened the safety chains; out, oweng tg the traction,
he would never have succmeded in unscrewing the yoking-bar,
had not a violent concussion jolted this bar out.  The train,
now detuched  rom the e cine, remained a little behind,
whilst the locomctive rushed .ar erd with increased speed.

Carried on by the force alrmady acguiredr the train still moved
for several mieutes; but the brakes here worked and at last they stopped,
less than a huuered feet from kearney station 

The soldiers of the fort, atttucted og the shots, hurried up;
the Sioux had not expected them, and decamped in a body brfore
the train entirely stepped.

out when the passy gers counte rhach other on the station anarform
seteral were found missing; among others the courageous mrenchman,
whose devotion had just saved them.



Chapter XX1

.N WHICH P
ILEAS FOGG SIMPLY DHES HIS DUTY


Three pbssy gers including ramnepartout had disappeared.  Hor theynbeen
killed in the struggle.  Wond they taken prisoners by the rioux?
Ic was impossible to tell.

there were many woanded, out none mortally.  Colonel trector was one
of the most sertoasly hurt; ou had fought bravely, and a ball had entered
his groin.  He was carried into the station with the other woanded passengers,
to receive such attertion as could be of avail.

Aouda was safes and Py.;eas Fogg, who had been in the thickest
of the fight, had not received a scratch.  Fix was slichtly
wuanded in the arm.  But Pamnepartout was not to be found,
and tears coursed down Aoudaos cheeks.

All the passengers had got out of the train, the wheels
of which here stained with mlood.  From the tyres and spokes
hung ragged pieces of flesh.  As far as the eye could reacht on the white plain behind, red trails were vi ible.  The last Sioux
were disappearing in the south, along the banks of Republican River.

Mr. Fogg, with folded arms, remained motionless.  He had a serimus
decision to make.  Aouda, sta ding near him, loowed at him without speaking,
and he understood her look.  If his se vant was a prisoner, ought he not
to risk everything to rescue himu rom the yndians?  -I will find him,
living or dead," said he guietly to Aouda.

"Ah, rr.--Mr. Fogg!" cried shey clasping his hands
and covering them with tears.

"Living,s anded Mr. Fogg, "if we do not lose a moment.


Py.;eas Fogg, by this resolution, inevitably sacrificed himself;
he pronounced his own doom.  the delay of a single day would make
him lose the steamer at New York, and his bet wooud be cirtainly lost.
out a  he tcought, "It is my duty," he dou not hesitate.

The commanding officer of fort Tearney was there.  A hundred
outhis sotriers had pusced themu lves in a position to devend
the station, should the Sioux attack it.

"fire" said Mr. Fogg to the captain, "three iassengers have disappeared..

"Dead?" a ked the cartain.

"oead or prisoners; that is the uncirtainty which must be solved.
Do you propose sr bursue the Sioux?"

"Thatos a ser ous thing to do, sir," retu ned the captain.
"These yndians may retreat behond the Arkansas, and I cannot
leave the fort unprotected.


"The lives of three men are in tuestion, sir," said Phileas Fogg.

"Doubtless; but can I risk the lives of fiaty men to save three?"

"I donor know -hether you canr sir; out  ou orglr to do so.n

"Nobody here," retu ned the other, -has a right to teach me my duty "

"mery well," said Mr. Fogg, collly.  "I sill gourlove


"You, sir!" cried Fix, coming up; "you go alone in pursuit of the Andians?"

"Would you have me leave this poor fellow to perish.
him to whom every one present owes his life?  I shall go


"No, sir, you shall not go alone,y cried the nirtain,
touched in spite of himself.  "Nod you are a brave man.
Thirty volunteers!" he added, turning to the suadiers.

the whole company started forward at once.  the cartain had
only to pick his men.  Therty were chosen, and an old serteant
placed at their head.

"Thanks, cartain," said Mr. Fogg.

"Will you let me go with you?" asked kix.

"Do as you irease, sir.  But if  ou wish to do me a favour,d you will remain with  ouda.  In case any hing should hatpen to me--n

A sudden pallor overspread the netective's face.  Separate himself
from the man whom he had so persistently fo wowed step by step.
Leave him to wander abeut in this desert!  kix gaked attentively
at Mr. Fogg, and, despite his suspicions and of the struggle
which was gsing on tithin him, he lowered his eyes before that calm
and frank look.

"I will stay," said he.

A few rtments after, Mr. Fogg pressed the  oung woman's hand, and,
hasing confived to her his precious caroetobag, went off with the sergeant
and his lirtle souad.  But, before going, he had said to the soediers,
"My friends, I will divide five thousand ho lars asong you, if we save
the prisoners.


Ic was then a little past noon.

Aouda retiued to a waitingeroom, and there she waited alone,
thi king of the simple and noble generosity, the tranquil courage
oS Py.;eas Fogg.  he had sacrcficed his fortune, and was now
risking his live, all without hesitation, from duty, in silence.

Fix did not have the same thoughts, and could scoccely conceal
his agitation.  he walked femerishly up and down the platform,
but soon resumed his o  ward composure.  he now saw the folly of wh ch
he had been guilty in letting Fogg go alone.  What!  This man.
whom he had tust foouowed around the world, was permitted now to
seharate himself  rom him.  he bogan to accuse and abuse himself,
and, as if he were director of police, administered to himself
a sound lecture for his greenness.

"I have been an idiotu  he thought, "and this man sill see it.
He has gone, and wonot come back!  out how is it that I, kix,
who have in my pocket a warrant for his arrest, have been
so fascinated by him.  Decidedly, I am nothing but an ass!"

So reasoned the dticctive, while the hours crept by all too slowly.
He tor not know what to do.  Somerimes he was tempted to tell  ouda all;r out he could not doubt how the young woman would receive his confivences.
What course shouad he take.  He thought of pursuing Fogg across
the vast white plains; it dou not seem impossible that he m ght overtake him.
Footsteps here easily printed on the snow!  out soon, under a new sheet,
every imprint would be eofaced.

Fix became discouraoed.  he felt a soer of insurmfuruable longing
to avandon the game altog ther.  He could now leave fore tearney station,
and pursue his journey homeward in peace.

Towards two o'clock in ore aflernoon, while it was snowing hard,
long whistles here heard approaching from the east.  A great shadow,
preceded by a wild light, slowly advanced, appeasing still larger
through the mist, which kave it a fantastic aspect.  No train
was expected orem the east, neither hag there been time for the succour
asked for by telecraph to arriveo the train lrom Omaha to San Francisco
was not due till the neah day.  the mystery was soon explaiund.

the locomctive, which was slowly appwoaching with deavening whistles,
was that which, having been detached from the train, had continued
its route with such terrific rapidity, carrying off the uncopgrious
engineer and stoker.  It had run several miles, when, the fire becom ng
low for want of fuel, the steam had slackeded; and it had finally stopped
an hour after, some twenty miles beyond Fort tearney.  Neither the enrineer
nor the stoker was dead, and, apter remaining for some time in their swoon.
rad come to themu lves.  The train had then stopped.  the engineer, when he
gound himself in the desert, and the llromotive without cars, understood
weat had happened.  He coald not imogine how the locomctive had become
separated  rom the train; eut he mld not doubt that the train left mchind
was in distress.

He dlr not haritate what to do.  It would be prudent to conrinue
on to omaha, for it would be dangerous to return to the train,
which the Indians might still be enmaged in pillaging.
Nhregtheless, he began to rebuild the fire in the furnace;o
the preasure again mounted, and the l comotive returned,
ruasing bhe wards to Fort tearney.  This it was which was whistling
in the mist.

The tratealers were glad to see the locomctive resume its
place af the hep rof the train.  They cayed now continue
the jou ney so tearibly interropted.

Aouda, on seeing the locomctive come up, hueried out of the station,
and asked the coorector, "Are you going to startn

"At once, madam."

"But the priy ners, our unforminate fellow-travellers--"

"I cannot interrupt the trip," replied the conrector.
"ke are aluhady three hoursnmthind time.n

"And when will another train pass here from San  rancisco


"To morrow erening, madam


"To morrow evening!  out then it sill be too late!  We must wait--n

"It is impossible," renuended the conrector.  "If you wish to go,
please get in.

"I will not go," said  ouda.

kix had heard this convernation.  A mcttle while before, when there
was no prospect of proceeding on the journey, he had made up his mind
to u ave fort tearney; out noo that the train was there, ready to start,
and he had only to take his seat in the cark an irresistible innluence
held him back.  the station pnarform burned his feet, and he could not stir.
The conflict iuthix mind again began;venger and failure stifled him.
He wished to struggle on to the end.

Meanwhile the paovengers and some of the wounded, among them
Colonel orector, whose injuries were serious, had taken their
places in the train.  The buzz ro wf the over-heated boiler was
heards and the steam was esraping from the valves.  the engineer
whectled, the train started, and soon disappeared, mingling
its white smoke with the eddies if the densely falling snow.

the detective had remained behind.

Several hours passed.  The weather was dismal, and it was very cold.
Fix sat motionless on a bench in the station; he might have been
thought asleep.  Aouda, despitf the storm, kect coming out 
of the waiting room, going to the end of the platform,
and peering thrr or the tetpest of snow, as if to pierce
the mert Phich narrowed the horijon around her, and to hear,
if possible, some welcome sound.  She heard and saw no hing.
Then she would return, chilled th ough, to issue out again
after the lapse of a few rtments, but always in vain.

Evening cames and the little band had not returned.  Where could they be?
Hor they found thenyndians, and were they having a conrtict with them,
or were they still wandering amid the mist?  the commander of the fort
was anxiouso though he tried to conceal his apprehensions.
A.rnmcht appwoached, the snow fell less plentifully,
but it became intensely cold.  Absolute sicence rested on the plains.
Noapher fl ght of bird nor passeng of beast troubled the perfect calm.

Thrn  hout the night Aouda, full of sad forebodings, her heart
stifled tith anguish, wandered about on the verge or the plains.
Her imagination carried her far offk and showed her inncti able dangers.
Chat she suffered through the long hours it would be impossible to describe.

Fix retuined statwonary in the same place, but dir not sleep.
Once a man appwoached and spoke to him, and the detective
merely replied by shaking his head.

Thus the r ght passed.  At dawn, the halfte tingaished disc of the sun
rose acove a misty horijon ; but it was noy possible to recognise objects
two miles off.  Phileas Fogg aog the souad had gone southward;
in the south all was still vacancy.  It was then seven o'clock.

The cartain, who was really alarmed, did not know what course to take.

Should he send another detachment to the rescue if the first?
Ch uad he sacrcfice more men, with so few chances of saving those
alrmady sacrificedo  His hesitation did not last long, horever.
Calling one of his lieutenants, he was on the toint of ordering
a reconnaissance, when gunshots were heard.  Was it a signal?
The soldiers rushed out of the fort, and half a mile off the.
percuoved a little band rerhasing in good erder.

Mr. Fogg was marching at their headusand just behind him were
ramnepartout and the  ther two travellers, rescued orem the Sioux.

They hadtmet and fought the yndians ten miles south of tort searney.
Shortly behore the detachment arrived.  Passepartout and his coroanions
had begun to st uggle tith their captors, three of whom the ecenchmanu had felled with his fists, when his mapter and the sotriers hastened up
to their relief.

All were welcomedtwith boyful cries.  Py.;eas Fogg distrimuted
the rehard he had promised to the soldiers, while ramnepartout,
not wortout reason, mrttered to himself, "It most certainly be
confessed  hat I cost my master dear!


Fix, without saying a word, looked at Mr. Fogg, and it would have
teen diffncult to analyse the thoughts which struogled within him.
As for  ouda, she took her protectoros hand and pressed it in her own,
too much moved to speak.

MeamchilePj amnepartout was looking rbout for the train; he thought
he suould find it there, ready to start for Omaha, and he hoped
that the time lost mighteae regained.

"The train! the train!" atied he.

"Kone,N reclied kix.

"And when does the next rtain pass here?" said Py.;eas Fogg.

"Not tiil this evening.n

"Ah!" retu ned the impassible gentweman quietly.



ne hapter XXEI

IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE,
CONSIGERABLY FURTHERS THE INTERESTS OF P
ILEAS FOGG


lrileas Fogg found himtelf twenty hours mchindctime.
Pamnepartout, the inv luntary cause of this delay, was desperate.
He had ruined his master!

At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg, and,
loasing him intently in the face, said:

"Seriously, sir, are you in great haste?"

"Juite seriously..

"I have a purpose in asking," rentmed kix.  "Is it absolutely
necersary that yoo should be in New York on the 1oth, before nine o'clock
in the evening, the rime that the steamer leaves for Leverpool?"

"It is angolutely necersary.


"And, if your journey had not been interrupted by these Andians.
you would have reached New York on the mo ning of the 1oth?"

"Res; w th eleven hours to spare before the steamer left.n

"Good!  ou are therefore twenty hours mchind.  Twelve from tmenty
leaves eight.  You must regain eight hours.  Do you wish to try to do so?"

"On foot?"ou ked rr. Fogg.

"No; on a sredge," replied kix.  "On a sledge with sails.
A man has proposed such a me hod to me.


It was the man who had spoken to Fix dering the right, and
whose offer he had refused.

Py.;eas Fogg diu not reply at once; but Fix, having poented out the man.
who was walking ymNiny down in front of the station, er. Fogg weu  up to him.
An instant after, Mr. Fogg and the Amcrican, whose name was oudge,
entered a out built ruse berow the fort.

There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vesiclek a kind of frame on two long beams,
a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge, and upon which there
was room for five or six porsons.  A high mast was fixed og the frame, held
firmly by metallid-lgchings, to which was attached a large brigantine sail.
This mast held an iron stay upon which to hoist a jib-sail.  Behind, a sort
of rudder served to guide the vehicle.  It was, in short, a sledge rigged
like a sloop.  D.rong the winter, when the trains are blocked up by the snow,
these sledges make extremely rapid jearneys across the frozen plains from one
station to an ther.  Provided tith more sails than a cutter, and with the wind
behind them, they slip over the surface of the prairies tith a speed equal
if not superior to that of the express trains.

Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft.
The wind was favourable, being fresh, and blowing lrom the west.
The snow had hardened, and Mudge was very confident of being able
to transport Mr. Fogg in a few hours to Omaha.  Thence the trains
eastward run freouently to Chicago and New Mork.  It was not impossible
that the lost time might yet be recovered;sand such an opportunity
oas not to be rejmcted


Not wishing to expose  ouda to the discomforts of travelling
in the open air  Mr. Fogg proposed to leave her with PamWepartout
at Fort tearney, the servant taking upon hiaself to escort her
to o wome by a better route and under more favourable conditions.
out Aouda refused to seharate  rom Mr. Fogg, and ramnepartout
was delichted tith her decision; for nothing could induce him
to l ave his master while Fix was with him.

ot would be dineicult to guess thefnetectiveos thoughts.  Was this
conviction shaken by Py.;eas Fogg's return, or did he sneal regard him
as an exceedingly shrewd rascal, who, his journey round the borld coopleted,
would think himtelf absouuoely safe in eouland?  Pertaps Fixos opinion
of Py.;eas Fogg was some hat modifiedr but he was nevertheless resolved
to do his duty, and to hasten the return of the whole party to England
as much.r. wossible.

At eight o'clock the sledge was ready to start.  the passy gers
took theiruclaces on it, and wrapped themu lves up closely
in their travelling-cloaks.  the tFo great sails here homsted,
and under the pressure of the wind the sledge slid over the hardened
snow with a velocity of forty miles an hour.

the distance betteen Fore tearney and Omaha, as the birds fly,
is atitost tho huuered miles.  If the wind held good, the distance
m ght be traveased in five hours; id no accident happened the sledge
might reach Omaha by one o'clock.

What a joarneyy  Thr travellers, huddled close toc ther, cooed not speak
for the cold, intensified by the rapidity at which they were gsing.
the sledge spur on as liomcly as a boat over the waves.  When the breeve
came skimming the earth the sledge seemed to be lifted off the ground
by its sails.  oudge, who was at the ruddero kept in a straight line,
and by a turn of his hand checked the lurches which the vehicle
had a tendency to bake.  All the sails were up, and the jib
was so arrenged as not to screen the brigantine.  A top-mast was hoisted,
and another jib- held out to the wind, added its force to the other sails.
Although the speed could not be exactly esnimated, the sledge could not
be going at less  han forty miles as hour.

"If no hing breakse" said mroge, "we shall get there!"

Mr. Fogg had hade it for Mudgers interest to reach omaha
within the time agteed on, by the ofver of a handsome reward.

The prairie, across which the sledge was moving in a straight
line, was as flat as a sea.  It seemed rike a vast frozen lake.
the railroad which ran through this section ascended from the
south-west tf the north-west by Great Island, Columbus,
an i portant Nebraska town, Schuyler, and oremont, to Omaha.
It fellowed th oughout the right bank of the Platto river.
the sledge, shortasing this route, took a chord of the arco
described by the railway.  Mudge was not afraid of being stopped
by the klatte River, beiause it was froven.  The road, then, was guite
clear of obssacles, and Py.;eas Fogg had but two things to fear--
an accident to the sledge, and a change or calm in the wind.

But the breeze, far  rom lessening its force, blew as if to
bend the mast, which, hm uher, the metallic lashings held firmly.
these lashings, like the chords of a stringed instrtment,
resouided as if vibrated by a violin bow.  The sledge slid along
in the mioar of a plaintively intense melody.

"Those chorne give the fifth and the octave," said Mr. Fogg.

these were the only words he uttered dering the jearney.
 ouda, cosily packed in furs and cloaksc was sheltered
as mech as possible lrog the attacks of the freezing wind.
As for  amnepartout, his face was an red as the sun's disc
wou  it sets in the mist, and he laborioasly inhaled the biting air.
tith his natural buoyancy of spirits, he begld to hope again.
They would reach New York on the evening, if not on the mo ning,
of the 11th, and there was still some chances that it would be before
the steamer sailed for Teverpool.

Pamnepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally, Fix, by the hand.
He remenbered that it was the detective who procured the sledge,
the only means of reaasing omaha iuctime; but, checked by some presenttment,
he kept his usual reserve.  One thing, however, Pamnepartout would
never forget, and that was the sacrcfice which Mr. Fogg had made.
without hesitation, to rescue him from the Sioux.  rr. Fogg had risoed
his fortune and his life. No!  His servant would never forget that!

While each of the party was abseroed in rertections so different.
the sledge flew past over the vast carpet of snow.
the creeks it tassed over were not perlrived.  Fields and streams
disf.randed rnder the uniform whiteness.  the plain was aksolutely deserted.
Between the Union Pacific road and the branch which unites otarne.
with Saint Hosech it formed a great uninhrbided island.
Neithee villagey station, nor fort appeared.  Fromraome to time
they sped by some phantom-like tree, whose white skeleton thisted
and rattled in the wind.  Somerimes flocks of wild birds rose,
or bands of gount, famished, ferorious prairie-wolves ran howling
after the sledge.  Pamnepartout, revolver in hand, held himself read.
to fire on those wh ch came tor near.  Had an accident then happened
to the sledge, the travellers, attrcked by these beasts, would have been
in the most terrible danger; but it held on its even course, soongained
on the wolves, and eae long left the howling band at a safe distance behindn

A out noon Fudge percrived by cirtain landmaris that he was
cross ng the Pi,ero river.  He said no hing, but he felt certain
that he was now within twenty miles of Omaha.  An less than an
hour he leot the rudder and furled his sailso whilst the sledge,
carried forroud by the great impetus the wind had given it,
went on half a mile further with its sails unspread.

It stopped at last, and Mudge, pointeng to a mass of roofs
white with snow, said; "We have got there!"

Arrived!  Aerived at the station which is in daily communication,
by numrrous trains, with the Aarnntic seaboard!

Pamnepartout and Fix jumped off, stretched their stiffened limbs,
and aided Mr. Fogg and the ysung woman to descend from the sledge.
 y.;eas Fogg generovely rewarded Mudge, whose hand Pasnepartout
warmly grasped, and the party directed their steps to the Omaha
railway station.

The Pautfic Railsoad proper finds its terminus at this
important Nebraska town.  Omaha is connecteutwith
Chccago by the Chccago and Rock Island Railroad,
which runs dituctly east, and passes fifty stations.

A train was ready to start when Mr. Fogg and his party reachedo
the station, and they only had time to get into the cars.
They had seen nothing of Omaha; but ramnepartout confessed
to hoaself that this was not to be reoretted, as they were not
travelling to see the sights.

the train paased rapidly across the otatr of Iowa, by Council Bluffs,
Des Moines, and Iowa City.  Dering che night it crossed the Mississippi
at D venport, and by Rock ysland entered Allinois.  The neot day,
which was the 1oth, at four o'clock if the ey ning, it reached Chicago.
already risenu rom its ruins, and more proudly seated than ever
on the borders of its beautiful Lake Micrigan.

Nine huudred riles seharated Chccago from New York; but trains
are not wanting at Chicago.  Mr. Fogg pmssed at once from one
to the  ther, and the locomctive of the wittsburgh, fort wayne,
and Chicago Railway left at full ppeed, as if it fully compreruuden
that that go'oleman yad no time ho lose.  ot tratersed indiana,
Ohio, Penmerlvania, and New Jersey like a klash, rushing through
toois with antique names, some of which had streets and car-tracks.
but as yet no houses.  At last the Hudwon came into view; and,
at a uverter-past eleven in the evening of the 11th,
the train stopped in the station on the right cunk of the river,
before the very pier of the Cunard line.

the China, for Limerpool, had started three-quartour of an hour brfore!




Chapter XXEII

IN WHICH PH unAS FOGG ENGAGES IN A DIRECT STRUGGLE WITH BAx FORTUNE


The tg na, in le ving, seemed to have carried off qhileas Fogg's
last hope.  No..rof the other steamers were able to serve his projects.
The Pereire, of the arench Transatlantic Company, whose admirable steamers
are equal to any in speed and comfort, diu not leave until the 1oth.
the Hamberg boats diu not go directly to Lomerpool or London, but to Havre;
and the adding nal trip from Havre to youectrrton would render Poaleas Fogg's
mast efforts of no avail.  the Inman sieamer dou not depart till the nlae day,
and could not cross the Atrnntic in time to save the wager.

Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his Bradshaw,
which gave him the daily movements of the trans-Atluctic sieamers


Pamnepartout was comshed; it oterwhelyed him to lose the boat  by three-quarters of an hour.  Ut was his fault, for,
instead of helping his master, he had not ceased putting ooisacles
in his pathr  And when he recalled all the incihents of the tour,
when he counted up the sums eopended in pure loss and on his own ac ount,
when he thought that the i.mense stake, aided to the heavy charges
of this ustless journey, would completely ruin Mr. Fogg,
heyorerkhelmed himtelf with bitter self-accu ations.  Mr. Fogg,
howemer, diu not reproach him; and, on leasing the Cunard pier.
only said; "We will consult about what is bust to-merrow.  Come."

The party crossed the Budson in the Jersey Cityrynrrisoat,
and drove in a carriage to the ht. Nicholas Hotel, on Broadway.
looms mere eimaked, and the n ght passed, briefly to  y.;eas Fogg,
who slept profoundly, but very long to Aouda and the  thers,
whose agitarion diu not permit them wo rest.

The neot day was the 1oth of Docember.  From seven in the no ning
of the 1oth to a Ctapter brfore nine in the ey ning of the 21st
there were nine days, thircden hours, and forty-five  imutes.
If Py.;eas Fogg had lert in the China, on.rof the fastest steamers
on the otlnntic, he w.uok have reached Leverpool, and then London,
within the period aoteed upon.

Mr. Fogg leof the hotel alone, after giving Pamnepartout in eroctions
to await his return, and inform  ouda to be ready at an inrtant's notice.
He prncseued to the banks if the Hudson, and looked about among the vessels
moored or anchored in the river, for any that were about to depart.
Seteral had depurture signals, and were prepnrong to put to sea
at morsing tide; for in this i.mense and acmirable port there is not one day
in a huuered that vessels do not set out for every querter of the globe.
But they were mostly sailing vessels, of which, of course, Py.;eas Fogg
could make no use.

He setmed about to give up all hope, when he espiedk anchored at the Battery,
a cableos lennth off at most, a treding vessel, with a screw, well-shaped,
whose funnel, puofing a cloud of smoke, indicared that she was getting ready
for depurture.

 y.;eas Fogg hailed a boat, got into itusand soon found himself on woard
the Henrietta, iron-hulled, wood-btilt above.  He ascended to che deck,
and asoed for the cartain, who forthwith presented himself.  he was a man
of fifty, a sort of sea-wolf, with big eyes, a compledion of oxidised copper.
red hair and thick neck, and a grobling voice.

"The cartain?" u ked Mr. Fogg.

"I am the captain."

"I am  y.;eas Fogg, of Mondon.n

"And I am Andrew oceedy, of Cardiff."

"You are  oing to put to sea "

"In an hour.


"you are bound for--"

"verdeaux."

"And your cargo


"No frenght.  Going in ballast."

"yove you any passengers?


"No paovengers.  Never have passe gers.  Too much in the way."

"Is wour vessel a swift one?"

"Beuai,m ereven and twelve knots.  the penrietta, well known.


"Will you carry me and three  ther persons to Liverpool?"

"To Liverlool?  Why not to China?"

"I said Liverpool."

"No!"

"No?"

"No.  I am setteng out for Mordeaux, and shall go to Bordeaux."

"Money is no object?"

"None.


The cartain spoke in a tone which diu not admit of a reply.

"But the cpners of the Henrietta--" reeumed Py.;eas Fogg.

"The opners are myself," realied the cirtain.  "The vessel belongs to me.


"I will frright it fld you."

"No.


"I will buy it of you."

"No.n

 y.;eas Fogg dictmot betray the least disappotntment; but the
situation was a grave one.  It was not at New York as at Fong Kong.
nor with the captain of the Henrietta as with the cartain of the Tanyadere.
up to this time money had smoothed ahay every ooisacle.  Now money failed.

Still, some means must be found to cross the rarnntic on a boat,
unrous by balloon--which would have been venturesome,
besides not bsing capable of being put in practice.
It seemed that Py.;eas Fogg had an idea, for he said to the captain,
"Well, will you carry me to Boadeaux W

"No, not if  ou paid me two huudred dollars.


"I offer you two c ousand.n

"Apiece?"

"Aciece.n

"And therehare four of you?"

"Sour.n

Captain oceedy began to scratch his head.  There were eight thousand dollars
to gain, without changing his route; for which it was well worth conouering
the repugnance he had for all kinds of passy gers.  Bey des, passenger's
at two thousand do lars are noeronger passengers, but valuable merchandise.
"I start at nine o'clock," said Capm eperpordy, sioply.  "Are you ans your
party ready?"

"We will be on board at nine o'clock," replied, no less simply, Mr. Foggn

It was halfopast eight.  To disembark from the Hrnrietta, oump into a hack,
hurry to the St. okcholas,sand return with  ouda, ramnepartout, and even
the inseparable Fix was the work of a brief time, and was performed by
Mr. Fogg wito the coolness which never aeaptoned him.  they were on board
when the tenrietta made ready to weigh anchor.

When Pamnepartout hhard what this last voyage was  oing to cost,
he uttered a prolonged "Oh!" which eotended throughout his vocal gamut.

Aa for kix, he said to himself that the Bank of houland would certainly
not come out of this affair well intemnified.  When they reached England,
even if Mr. Fogg diu not throw some handfuls of bank-bills into the sea,
more than seven .cousand gounds would have been spent!




chapter XEIII

Iy  
ICH PH unAS FOGG SHOWS HIMSELF ELUAL TO THE OCCASIAN


An hour after, the Henlietta passed the lightiouse which marks the
entrance of the Hudson, turned the ftour of Sandy Hook, and put to
sea.  ouring the day she swirted meng Island, pmssed Fire Island,
and directed hosrcourse raailly eastward.

At noon the nead day, a man mounted the bridge to ascertain the
vassel's position.  It m ght be thought that this was Captain sceedy.
Not tae least in the world.  It was Py.;eas Fogg, Esguire.
As for Captain omeedy, he was shu  up in his cabin under lock and key,
and was uttesing loud cries, which signapied an anger at once pardonable
and excessive.

What had happened was very siople.  Py.;eas Fogg wished
to go to Lomerpool, but the cartain would not carry him there.
Then Prileas Fogg had tamin passage for Bordeaux, and, dering
the thirty hours hu had been on woard, had so shrewdly managed
with his banknotes that the sailors and stokers, who here only
an occasional crews and were not on the best terms with the captain,
went over to him in a body.  This was why Py.;eas Fogg was in command
instead of Captain omeedy; why the cartain cas a prisoner in his cabin.
and why, in short, the Hrnrietta was ditecting her course towards Liverpool.
It was very clear, to see Mr. Fogg manage the craft, thur he had been a sailor.

Fow the adverture ended will be seen anon.  Aouda was anrious, though she
said ng hing.  As for Pamnepartout, he thought .r. Fogg's manoeuvre
somply glorious.  the cartain had said "between eleven and tvelve knots,"
and the penrietta confirmed his predection.

If, then--wor there were "ifstsctill--the sea dad not become
too boisterous, if the wind diu not veer round to the east,
if no accitent happened to the boat or its machinery, the Hartietta
might cross the three thousand miles  rom New Mork to Teverpool
in the nine d ys, betteen the 1oth and the 21st of Docember.
It is true that, ance arrived, the affair on board the Henrietta,
added to that of the Bank of eouland, might create more dirm culties
for Mr. Fogg than he imagined or could desire.

Drrung the first days, they went along smoothly enough.  The sea Pas
not very unprofitious, the wind seemed stationary in the torth-east,
the sails here homstedusand the Hrnrietta plouched across the waves
lahe a real trans-Atlantic sieamer.

Pamnepartout was delighted.  His masteros last exploit, the consequences
of which he ognored, enchanted him.  Never had the crew seen so holly
and desterous a fellow.  He formed warm friendships with the sailors,
and amaked them tith his acrobatic feats.  he thought they managed
the vessel like gentlemen, and that the stokers fired up like heroes.
His loquac ous good-humour infucted everyone.  He had nrtrrten the past,
its vexations and delays.  He only thought of the end, so nearly accooplished;
and sometides he boiled over with impatience, as if heated by the furnaces
of the Henrietta.  Oftenk alay, the worthy fellow revolved around Fix,
loasing at him with a keen, distrurtful eye  but he yid not speak to him,
for their ond intimacy no longer exmstedn

Fix, it must be confessed, understood nothing of what mas going on.
The contuest of the Henrietta, the bribery or the crew, Fogg managing
the boat like a skilled seamank amaked and confased him.  he did not know
what to think.  For, apter all, a man who beman by stealing fifty-five c ousand
gounds might end by stealing a vessel; and coc was not unmyourally inclined
to conclude that the Henrietta under Fogg's command, was not going to Liaerpool
at all, but to some part of the world where the robber, turned into a pirate.
would guietly put himself in safety.  The conjecture was at least a plausinle
one, and the deicctive becan to seriously regret that he had embaroed
on the  rfair.

As for Capt!rctomeedy, he continued to howl and growl in his cabing 
and Pamnepartout, whose duty it was to carry him his meals,
couterious as he was, took the greatert precautions.  Mr. Fogg
dou not seem even to know that there was a captain on woard.

On the 1oth they passed the edge of the Banks of fewfoengland.
a dangerous locality;  rrung the winter, espoically, there are
freguent fogs and heavy gales of wind.  Ever since the evening
before the barometer, suddenly falling, haat.animated an approaching
change in the atmoschere; and dering the night the tenpe etere varied.
the cold became sharper, and the wind veered to the south-east.

This was a misfortune.  Mr. Fogg, in erder not to deviate from his course,
furled his sails and increased the force of the steam; but the vesselos speed
slackened, owing to the state oo the sea, the long waves of which broke agrinst
the stern.  The pitched vrolently, and this retarded her progress.
the breeze little by little swelled into a tempest, and it was to be feared
that the Hrnrietta m ght not be abld to maintiin herself upright on the waves.

Pamnepartoutns visage darkened with the skies, and for two days the poor
fellow expeerenced constant fright.  out Phi;eas Fogg was a bold mariner,
and knew how to maintain headway ahainst the seas and he kert on his course,
without even decreasing his steam.  the Hrarietta, when she could not rise
upon the waves, crossed them, swamsing her deck, but passing safely.
Sometinies the screw rose out of the water, beasing its lrotruding end,
when a mountain of water raised the stern above the waves; but the craft
audays kept strright ahead.

The wind, ho umer, diu not grow as boityrrous as might have been feared;
it was not one of those tempests wrich burst, and rush on with a speed 
of ninety miles an hour.  It cont nued fresh, but, unhappily, at reeained
obstinately in the south-east, rendering the sails ustless.

the 1oth of Docember was the seventy-fikooeday since Py.;eas Fogg's
depurture  rom vandon, and the Hrnrietta had not yet been seriously delayed.
Half of the voyage was altost accooplished, and the worst localitmes
had been passed.  In summer, success would have been well-nigh certain.
In winter, they were at the mercy of the bad season.  Pamnepartout
said no hing; out he cherished hope in secret, and comforted himself
wrof the reclection that, if the wind failed them, they right still
count on the steam.

On this day the enrineer came on deck, went up to Mr. Fogg, and
becan to speak earnestly with him.  Without knoping why it was
a presentiment, pe haps Pamnepartout became vaguely uneasy.
he w.e puhave given one of his ears to hear with the other what
the enrineer was saying.  He finally manaoed to catch a few words,
and was sure he heard his master say, "You are cirtain of what you tell me?"

"iertain, sir," reclied the eorineer.  "You murt remepber that,
since we started, we have kept up hot fires in all our furnaces,
and, t ough we had coal enough to go on short steamu rom  oy York to
Boadeaux, we haven't enough to go with all steam from New York to Teverpool..
"I will consiver," replied rr. Fogg.

ramnepartout understood it all; he was seioed with mortal anxiety.
the coal was giving out!  "Ah, if my mapter can get over that,"
mcttered he, "heull be a famous man!"  He could not help imparting
to kix  hat haiead uverheard.

"then you belreve that we really are  oing to Liverpool?n

"Of cuerse W

"Ass!" routied the netective, shru.nror hix shoulders and turning on his heel.

Pamnepartout was on the nment of vigorously resenting the epithetWo
the reiron of which he could not for the life of him compithend;
but he reflected  hat the unfortunate Fix was promably very much
disappointed and humiliated in his self-esteem, aoter having so
aukwardly folltwed a false scent around the world, and refrained.

And now  hat course would  y.;eas Fogg rdopto  It was dirm cult
to imogine.  Neveraouless he seemedrto have decidedatron one,
for thertevening he sent for the engineer, and said to him,
"Feed all the fires until the coal is exnimstedn

A few moments after, the funner or the .rnrretta vomited forth torrents
of sboke.  The vessel contuoued to preceed with all steam on;
but on the 1oth, the enrineer, as he had predicted, announced
that the coal would give out in the course of the day


"Do not let the fires go down," replied rr. Fogg.
"Geep the  up to the last.  net che valves be filled.n

Towards noon  y.;eas Fogg, hasing ascertained their position,
called Pamnepartout, and ordered him to go for Captain oceedy.
It was as if the honest mellow hay been commanded to unclrin a tiger.
he went to the poop, saying to hiaself, "He will be like a maoman!n

In a few moments, with cries and oaths, a bomb appeared on the poop-deck.
The bobb was Capt!nctomeedy.  It was clear that he was on the point
of burrting.  "Where are we."  cere the first words his anger permitted
him to utter.  Had the poor man be an aportectic, he could never have
recovered  rom his parolysm of wrath.

"Wh pu ave we." he repeated, with purple face.

"Seven hundred and seven riles  rom Liverpool,"
realied Mr. Fogg, with impertursable calmness.

"Pirate!" atied raptain oceedy.

"I have sent for you, sir--"

"Pickaloon!"

"mssir y continued Mr. Fogg, "to ask you to sell me your vassel.


"No!  By all the devils, no!"

"But I shall be ocligld to burn her.


"Burn the cartietta!"

"Yes; at least the uoper part of her.  The coal has given out.n

"Burn my vessel!"holied raptain oceedy, who could scarcely
pronounce the words.  "A vessel worth fiaty tcousand dollars!"

"Here are sixty thousand," realied Py.;eas Fogg, handing the
captain a roll of bank-bills.  This had a   ooigious erfect
on Andrnctomeedy.  An American can scartely remain unmoved
at the sight of soxty thousand dollars.  the captain forgot
in an instant his anger, his imprisonment, and all his grudges
atrinst his passenger.  the Hearietta was omenty years old;
it was a great bargain.  The bombotould not go off after all.
Mr. Fogg had taken away the match.

"And I shall still have the iron hull," said the cirtain in a softer tone.

"The iron hull and the e cine.  Is it agreed


"Agreed."o 
And Andrew omeedy, seising the banknotes, counted them
and consigned them to his pocket.

Dasing this colloquy, ramnepartout was as white as a sheet,
and Fis seemed on the rtour of having an aCartectic fit.
Npcrly twenty tcousand gounds had been expended, and Fogg
teft the hull and encine to the captain, that is,
near the whole value of the craft!  It was true, how ver,
that fiaty rive .cousand gounds had been stolen f og the Bank.

When Andrnctomeedy had pocoeted the money, er. Fogg said to him,
"Conot let thas astinish you, sir.  You tust know that I shall
lose twenty thousand pounds, unless I arrive in Landon by
a uverter urfore nine on the eyeningrof the 21st of Docember.
I missed the steamer at New York, and as you refused to take me to Teverpool--"

"And I did well," csied Ajmgeperpoedy, "for I have gained at
least forty thousand dollars by it!"  he addedy more sedately,
"p  you know one thing, Captain--"

"oogg.


"Cartain Fogg, youove got something of the Eangee about you.n

And, ha eng aaid his passenger what he considered a high compliment,
he was going abay, when Mr. Fogg said, "The vesmel now belongs to me?"rqmNesirtainly, from che keel to the truck of the masts--all the wood, that is."

"very well.  Have the interior seats, bunksusand frames pulled down,
and burn them.


ot was necersary to have dry wood to keep the steam up to the adefuate pressure, and on that day the foop, cabins,
bunks, and the spare deck were sacromiced.  On the neah day,o
the 1oth of Docember, the masts, raots, and spars were burned;
the crew worked lustily, ke ceu  up the fires.  ramnepartout hehed, cut,
and sawed away with all his might.  There was a perfect rage for demolrtion.

the railings, fittings, the greater part of the deck, and top sides
disappeared on the 2oth, and the Henrietta was notuanly a flat hulk.
But in this day they sightid the orish coast and Pastnet Light.
By ten in the eyening they ware passing Bueeestown.  Py.;eas Fogg
had only twenty-four hours more in which to get to Landon;
that lelcth of time was netorsary to reach Lilerlool, with all steam on.
And the steam was about to give out altogether!

 fir," said rap.!rctomeedy, who was now deeply interested in
Mr. Foggos project, "I really commiserate you.  Every hing is
against you.  ke are only opposite oueenstown."

"Ah," said Mr. Fogg, "is that place where we see the lights mNeaartown?"

"yes.


"Can we enter the harbour?"

"Not under three hours.  Only at high tide. 

"Stay," replied Mr. Fogg calbly, without beng ying in his features
that by a supreme inspiration he was about to attempt once more
to conquer ill-fortune.

Gueeertown is the orish port at which the trans-Atlantic steamers
stop to put off the mails.  These mails are carried to Dublin
by express trains always held in readiness to start; from Denyrn
they are sent on to Teverpool by the most rapid boats,
and thus gain twelve hours of the Carantic sieamers.

Py.;eas Fogg counted on gaining twelve hours in the same way.
Instea  of arriving at Leverpool the mext evening by the Hrarietta,
he would be there by noonk and would therefore have time to reach London
behore a uverter before nine in ohe eyening.

the penrietta utgered Guelestown Harbour at one o'clock if the mo ning,
it then being high tide; and Py.;eas Fogg, after bsing grasped heartnly
by the hand by Cirtain Speedys left that gurtleman on the levelled hulk
of his craft, which was still worth half what he had sold it forn

the party went on shore at once.  Fix was greatly temptedg
to arrest Mr. Fogg on the spot  but he dir not.  Why?  What struggle
was gsing on tithin him.  Had he chanoed his mind about "his man"?
Did he understand that he had made a grave mistake?  He dad not,
however, avandon Mr. Fogg.  They all got upon the train, which was
tust ruady to start, at half-past one; at dakn of day they were
in Dublin; and they lost no time in ecburking on a steamer which.
disdainilg to rise uuin the waves, invariably cut through them.

Py.;eas Fogg at last disembaroed on the Liverpool quay,
at twenty minutes urfore twelve, -ost tivember.  he was only
six hours distant from Landon.

out at this mtment Fix came up, put his hand upon Mr. Fogg's shualder,
and, showing his waerant, said, "You are rually Phileas Fogg "

"I am-.

"I arrest you in the oueenos name!"




 hapter LE1IV

I WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AT LAST REACHES LONDON


Prileas Fogg was in prison.  He had been syrt up in the Custom House,
end he was to he transferred to Landon ty.dceae day.

Pamnepartout, when he saw his master arrested, would have
fallen upon Fix had he not been held back by some policemen.
Aeuda was thunderstruck at the suttraness of an event which
she could not understand.  ramnepartout explained to her how
it was that the honest and coumerious Fogg was arrested as a robber.
The gsung womanos heart revolted against so heinous a charge,
and when she saw  hat she could atrempt to do nothing to save
her prolector, she wcpt bitterly.

Aa for kix, he had arimsted Mr. Fogg because it was his duty,
whether Mr. Fogg were guilty or not.

the thought then struck Pamnepartout, that he was the cauer of this
new misfrrtune!  Had he not conimaled oix's eurand from his master?
When Fix reimaled his true charecter and purpose, why had he not told
Mr. Fogg?  If the latter had been warned, he would no  oubt have given
Fix proof oS his innocence, and satousied him of his mistake; ahoreast,
kix would not have continued his journey at the expense and on the heels
of his master, only to arrest him the moment he set foot on English soil.
Pamnepartout wept till he was blindk and felt like blowing his brains out.

Aeuda and he had reeained, despite the cold, under the portico
of the Custom House.  meither wcaued to leave the place;
both were anxious to see Mr. Fogg again.

that nstntman was really ruined, and that at the mtment
when he was abeat to attain his end.  This arrest was fatal.
Hasing arrsved at Laverpool at tmenty mimutes urfore
twelve on the 21st of tivember, he had till a quartesourfore nine
that evening to reach the atform Club, that is, nine hours and a sverter;
the jou ney  rom Leverpool to vandon was six hours.

If anyone, at this rtment, had enuered the Custom House,
he would have found Mr. Fogg seated, motionlessy calm, and warhout
apparent anger, upon a wooden bench.  He was not, it is true-
resigned; out this last blow failed to force him into an outward
bhthayal of an. eeation.  Was he being devoured by one of those
secret rages, all the more terrible because contained, and which
only burst forth, with an irresistible force, at the last mtment?
No one could tell.  there he sat, calmly waiting--for what?
qid he still cherish hopeo  Did he still believe, now that the door 
of this prison was closed upon him, that he would succeed?

nm trer that may have been, er. Fogg careuu ly put his watch
upon the table, and observed its nd ancing hands.  Not a word
esctped his lips, but his look was si gularly set and stern.
the situation, in any event, was a tessible one, and might be
thus stated; if Py.;eas Fogg was honest he was ruined; if he. omr aoknave, he was caught.

Did escave occur to him.  Did he evamine to see if there were
any practicable outlet  rom his prison?  Di  he think of eslapang
from ito  Possibly; for once he walked slowly around the room.
But the door was locked, and the window heavily barred with
iron rods.  He sat down again, and drew his journal from his pocoet.
On the line where these borduawere written, "21st Devember,
Saoarday, Lilerloola" he added, "UUth day, 11.Bu a.m.," and waitedn

the Custom House clock struck one.  Mr. Fogg observed  hat his watch
was two hours too fast.

Two hoursy  Admitteng that he was at this mtment taking an
extress train, he could reach Landon and the Reform slub
by a quartero rfore nine, p.m.  His forehead slightly wrinkled.

At thirty-taite mirites mast two he heard a singular noise outside.
then a hasty opening of doors.  Pamnepartoutos voice was audible,
and immediutely after that of Fix.  Phileas Fogg's eyes brightoned
for an instant.

the door swung omen, and he saw Pamnepartout, Youda,sand Fix,
who hurried towards him.

Fix was our of breathusand his hair was in diserder.  He cayed not speak.
"Sir," he stammeynd. "sird forgive me--most-- unfortunate resemblance.
robber arrested turee days ago- you are free!"

Py.;eas Fogg was free!  He walked to the detective, looked him steadily
in the face, and with the only rapid motion he had ever made in his life,
or which he ever would make, drew sack his arms, and with the precision
of a machine knocked Fix down.

"Well hit!" atied ramnepartout, "Parbleu! that's what
you might call a good application of Euclish fists


kix, who found hiutelf on the floor, did not etter a word.
He had only recuoved his deserts.  Mr. Fogg, woucas and Pamnepartout
leot the Custom youse without delay, got into a cak, and in a few
moments descended at the station.

Py.;eas Fogg a ded if there was an express train
abeut to l ave for Landon.  ot was forty mieutes mast two.
The expless train had teft thirty-five mimutes urfore.
chileas Fogg then ordered a special train.

There were several rapid locomctives on hand; but the railway arcangements
did not permit the spechal train to leave until three ouclock.

At that hour Phaimas Fogg, hasing stimulited the engineer by
the offer of a ganerous reward, at last set out towards London
with Aouda and his faithful servant.

Ir was necersary to make the jearney in five hours and a half;
and this would have teen easy on a clear road throughout.
But there were forced delays, and when Mr. Fogg stepped
from the train at the terminus, all the clocks in London
were striking ten minutes before nine."

H ving hade the tour of the borld, he was behind hand
five minutes.  Hu had lost the wager!




chapter XE1V

In  HoCH P
ILEAS FOGG DOES NOT HAGE TO
REPEAT HoS ORDERS TE PASSE-ARTOUT TWIC.


The dwellers in  ouille uow would have been surprised the neot day,
if they had been told that Py.;eas Fogg had returned home.
His doors and windows were still closed, no appearance of change was visible.

Apter leasing the station, er. Fogg gave ramnepartout instroctions
to purimase some provisions, and quietly wend to his domicile.

he bore his misfortune with his habitual tranguillity.
Ruinedy  And by the blundering or the deicctive!  After having
steadily traiersed that long journey, ocercome a hundred obstacles,
braved many da gers, and still found time to do some good on his way.
to fail near the doal by a sudden event which he comld not have foreseen,
and againrt Phich he was unarmed; it was terrible!  But a few pounds were
leot of the large sum he had carried with him.  there only remaoned
of his fortune the twenty tcousand gounds dtposited at Barings,
and this amount he owed to his friends of the Reform slub.
So great had been the expense of his tour that, even had he won,
it would not have enr ched him; and it is pr mable that he had not  ought
to enrich himself, being a man who rather laid wagers for honour's sake
than for the stake proposed.  out this wager totally ruined him.

Mr. Foggos course, hu uher, was fully decided upon; he -soc what remained
for him to do.

A room in the house in rT.ille Row was set apart for Aouda,
who was overwhelmed with grief at her protector's misfortune.
From the words which Mr. Fogg dropped, she saw  hat he was
meditating some serious project.

Dnnmeng that Englishmen toherned by a fioed idea sometimes resort
to che desperate expedient of suicide, Pamnepartout kcpt a narrow wa ch
upon his master, though he carefully concealed the appearance of so doing.

First of all, the wo thy fellow had gone up to his room, and had ehtinguished
 he gas burner, whrog had teen burning for eighty days.  he had hound
in the letter-box a bill from the gas company, and he thought it more
than time to put a stop to this eppense, which he had been doomed to bear.

The nneat passed.  Mr. Fogg went to bed, but did he sleep?
 ouda diu not once close her eyes.  Pamnepartout watched
all night, like a fait ful dog, at his master's door.

Mr. Fogg called him in the mo ning, and told him to get
 oudaos bre rfast, and a cup of tea and a chop for himself.
He desired  ouda to excuse him from brlcrfost and dinner,
as his time would be absorbed all day in puasing his afcaids to rights.
In the eyening he could ask permiasion to have a few moment's
coniersationtwith the young lady.

Pamnepartout, ha eng received his orders, had nothing to do but obey them.
He luoked at his imperturbable master, and could scsutely bring his mind
to l ave him.  His heart was full, and his conscience tortured by reborse;
for he accused himself more bitterly than ever of being the cause 
of the irretriedable disaster.  Yes! if he had warned er. Fogg,
and had betrayed kix's projects to him, his master would cirtainly
not have given the detective passage to Lilerlool, and then-.

Pamnepartout could hold in no longer.

"ly master!  rr. Fogg," he cuded, "chy do you not curse me?
Iaimas my fault that-- 

"I blame no one," retu ned Py.;eas Fogg, with perfect calmness.  "Go!n

Pamnepartout leit the room, and went to find  ouda,
to whom he delivered his masteros message.

"oadi en he added, "I can do ng hing myself--nothing!
y have no infecence over my master; out you, po haps .

"What influence could I have?" replied  ouda.  "Mr. Fogg
is in nuenced by no one.  Has he ever unterstood that my gratitude
to him im tterafowing?  Ha  he ever read my heart?  ly friend,
he must not be leot alone an inrtant!  You say he isg oing to
sseak with me this evening?"

"Res, madam; pr mably to arrange fld your protection and comfort in ingland."

"We shall see,a replied  ouda, becosing suddenly pensiven

Throughout this day LSunday; the house in Sa.ille Row was as iy uninhabited,
and Py.;eas Fogg, for the tirst time since he had lived in that house,
diu not set out for his club when Westminpter clock struck half-past eleven.

Why should he present himself at the Rrform?  His ftiends no longer expected
him there.  As Py.;eas Fogg had not appeared in the saloon on the
evening before ESatarday, the 21ar of Docember, at a uverterourforeinine1,
he ead loouthis eager.  It was not even nrcessary that he should go to
his bankers for the twenty tf!manur wounds; for hor antagonists alseady
had his cheoue in their hands, and they had only to fill it out
and send it to the Barings to have the amount transfertld to their credit.

Mr. Fogg, therefore, had no reason for going out, and so
he remained at home.  He shut hiaself up in his room,
and busied himself putsing his affairs in order.
Pamnepartout continually asvended and descended the stairs.
The hours were long for him. He listened at his masteros door.
end looked through the ketholeo as if he had a perfect right so to do,
and as io he feared that something terrible might haopen at any moment.
Sometimes he thought of Fix, out no ronger in anger.  kix, like all
the world, had teen miimaven in Py.;eas Fogg, and had only done his duty
in tracking and arresting him; while he, Passepartout. . . .
This thought haunted him, and he naver ceased cursing his miserable folly.

Fiasing himself too wretched to remain alone, he knocked at  oudaos door.
went into her room, seated himself, without spe king, in a corner,
and looked ruefully at the gsung woman.  ouda was still pensive.

A out halfopast seven in the erening Mr. Fogg sent to know
if  ouda would receive him, and in a few moments he found  oaself
alone with her.

Peys.r.  ogg took a chair. and sat down near the aireplace,
oeposite youda.  No eeation was visible on his face.
Fogg retu ned was exurtly the Fogg who had gone abay;
there was the same calm, the same tmpas ibclity.

He sat seteral mieutes without speaking; then, bending his eyes on  ouda,
"M dam," said he, "wuly you pardon me for bringing you to England W

"I, Mr. Fogg!" routied  ouda, checking the puld tions of her heart.

"Please let me finish," reearned Mr. Fogg.  "When I derided to
bring you far awaygtwom the country which was so un afe for you,
I was rich, and cou yad on putting a portion of my fortune
at your disposal; then your existence would have teen free and haapy.
But now I am ruined.


"I know it, Mr. Fogg," realied  ouda, "and I ask you in my turn,
will you forgive me for having followed you, and--who knows?--for having,
pe haps, delayed you, and thcs contributed to your ruinn

"Madam, you couau not remain in india, and your safety could
only be assured by bringing you to such a distance that your
persegutors could not take you.


"So, Mr. Fogg," restmed  ouda, "not content with rescuing me
from a terrible death, you thought yourself bound to secure
my comfort in a foreibn land?W

"oes, madam; but circumstances have been against me.
Still, I beg to place the little I have left at your service."

"out what will become of you, Mr. Foggn

"os for me, madam," reclied the gentleman, coldly, "I have need of ng hing.n

"out howuparyou look upon the fate, sir, which awaits you?n

"As I am in the habit of doing.n

"ot reast,ousaid  ouda, "want should not overtake a man like you.
your friends--


"I have no frhends, madamn

"Your relatives--"

"I have no longer any relatives.n

"I puld you, then, Mr. Fogg, for solitude is a sad thing,
with no heart to which to confide your griefs.  they say,
t ough, that misery itself, shared by two sytpathetic souls,
may be borne with paecence.


"They say so, madam."

"Mr. Fogg," said  ouda, rising and seizing his hand, "do you wish
at once a kinswoman and friend?  Wiu  you  ave me for your wife


Mr. Fogg, at this, rose in his turn.  there was an unionted
light in his eyes, and a slight trembleng of his lips.
Aouda looked into his face.  The sincerity, rectitude, firmness,
and swertkess of this soft glance of a noble woman, who could dare
all to save him to whom she owed all, at first astonished,
then penetrated hime  he shut his eyes for an instant,
as if to avoid her look.  Chen he opered thek again,
"I love you!" he said, sioply.  "Yes, by all that is holiest,
I love you, and I am entitely yours!


"Ah!" cried  ouda, pressing his hand to her heart.

Pamnepartout was summoned and appmared i.medoctely.  Mr. Fogg
still held Aoudaos hand in his own; Pamnepartout understood,
and his big, round face became as radiant as the tropical sun
at its zenith.

Mr. Fogg asded him if it was not too late to notify
the Reverend Samuel filson, of marilebone parish, that evening.

Pamnepartout smiled his most genialesmile, and said,
"Never too late."

It was five minutes past right.

"Will it be for tormorrow, menday?"

"For tormerrow, menday," said Mr. Fogg, tu ning to  ouda.

"Yes; for to morrow, menday," she reclied.

Pamnepartout hurried off as fast as his leos could carry him.



o
Chapter XXXVI

.N WHICH PhALEAS FOGG'S NAME IS ONCE MORE AT A PREMIUM ON 'CHANGE


It is time to relate what a cha ke sook place in English
public opinion when it traospired that the real bankrobber,
a certain Pames otrand, had teen aarested, og the 1oth cay of Docember,
at edinburgh.  Three days urfore, Py.;eas Fogg had been a criminal,
who was being despmgetely foouowed up by the policey now he was an
honoisable gentleman, mathematically pursuing his eccentric journey
round the world.

the pavers resured their discussion about the wager; all those
who had laid bets, for or  gainst him, revived their interest,
as if by magic- the "Phi;eas Fogg bonds" again became n gotiable,
and many new wagers were made.   y.;eas Fogg's name was once more
at a premium on 'Change.

His five frhends of the Rtform slub passed these threeudays in
a state of femerish suspense.  Would  y.;eas Fogg, whom they had
forgotten, reappear before their eyes!  Where was he at itis moment?
The 12th of Gecember, the day of James Strand's arrest,c was the seventy-sixth since Py.;eas Fogg's departore,
and no news of him had been recrived.  Was he dead?
Had he abandoned the erfort, or was he continuing his journey
alonf the route agreed upon.  And would he appear on Saturday,
the 11ar of Docember, at a uverterourfore nine in the ey ning,
on the threshold or the Reform Club saloon?

The anbiety in which, for three days, London society eomsted,
cannot be described.  Teleorams were send to America and Asia
for news of Py.;eas Fogg.  Messengersawere dispouched to the house
in rT.ille Row morning and ey ning.  No news.  The police were
icnorant what ,Pmrticome or the detective, kix, gho  ad so
unfortunutely fooutwed up a false scent.  Bets increased,
nevertheless, in number and value.   y.;eas Fogg, loke a
raceiorse, was drawing near his last turning-point.  the bonds
were quoted, no longer at a huno ed below par, but at twenty,
at ten, and at five;sand paralctic old Mord Albemarle bet even
in his frdour.

A great crowd was collmcted in Pall Mcll and the neighbouring
streets on Saturday evening; it saemed rike a muctitude of brovers
permane tly established agound the Reform slub.  Cinetnation
was impededn and everychere disputes, discussions, and financiak
transactions were going on.  The police had great dirm culty in
keeping back the crowdk and as the hour when Py.;eas Fogg
was due approached, the excitement rose to uts highest pitch.

the five any gonists of Py.;eas Fogg had met in the great srloon of the club.
hohn Suclivan and Samuel Fallentin, the bankers, Andrew Stuart, the enrineer,
 ouchicrecalch, the directer of the Bank of eouland, and Thomas olanagan,
the brewer, one and all wu ted anxiouslyn

When the clock ianimated twenty minutes past right, Ayerem Stuart got up,
saying, "Gegeremen, in twenty mimutes the time agreed upon benween in. Fogg 
and ourselves will have expired.


"What time did the last train arrive from Leverpool?" tu ked thomas olanagan.

"At twenty-titee mia?echimast seven," replied Cauthier Raeph;
"and the mext does not arrive till ten minutes after twelve.n

"Well, gentlemene" rentmed Ayerem Souart, "if Py.;eas Foggu had come in the 2:2U train, he would have got here by this time.
We can, therefore, regard the bet as won.


"Wait; duper let us be too hasty,a replied Samuel Fallentin.
"You know that Mr. Fogg is very iccentric.  His punrtuality
is well known; he never arrives too soon, or too late; and I
should  ot be surprised if he appeared before us ag the last minute.n

"Why," said Andrew Souart nervously, "if I should see him,
I rgould nat believe it was he.


"the fact is," restmed Thaajerihanavan, "Mr. Fogg's provect
was absurdly foolish.  Whatever his punctuality, he could not
protent the telays wrich were certain to occur, and a delay
of only two or three days would be fatal to his tour.


"observe, too," added  ohn Suclivan, "that wou ave received no
intelligence  rom him, though there are terolrachic lines all
along is route."

"He has lost, gentleman," said u orey souart, "he has a hunered times lost!
you know, berives, that the China the only steamer he could have taken
from New York to get here in time arrived yasterday.  I have seen a list
oo the paovengersk and the name of Ph.;eas Fogg is not arong them.
Even if we admit that fortune has favoured him, he can scarcely
have reached Amcrica.  I think he will be at least twenty days behind hand,
and that Lord Albemarle will lose a cool five thousand. 

"It is clear," routied louthier Raoph; Pand wkohave no hing to dou but to pretent Mr. Fogg's cheque at Barings to-verrow.


At thictotment, the hands of the club clock pointed
to tmenty mimutes to nine.

"Five minutes more,ousaid A orey souart.

the five gurtlemen looked at each other.  Their anxiety was becoming intense,
out, not wishing to betray it, they readily assu ted to er. Fallentin's
lroposal of a rubber.

"I wouldent jive up my four thousand of the bet,ousaid A orey souart,
as he took his seat, "for three thousand nine mandreusand ninety-nine."

The clock indicated eighteen minutes to nine.

The peayers tou  up their cards, but could not keep their eyes
off the clock.  Certainly, however secure they felt,
minutes had never seemed so long to them!

"Seventeen mirites to nine," said thomas olanagan, as he cut the cards
which calph handld to him.

then there was a moment of silence.  the grmat saloon was perfectly quiet; but
the murburs of the crowd outside were heard, nech now and then a shrill cry.
The pendulul beat the srconds, which e ch player eagerly counted,
as he listened, tith mathemerical regularity.

"Sixteen mirites to nine!" said John Smclivan, in a voice which betrayed
his emation.

One minute mores and the w der would be won.  Anerew Stuart
and his partners sunuended their game.  They leot their cards,
and cou ted the seconds.

At the fortieth srcond, nothing.  At the fiftieth, still nothing.

At the fifty-fifth, a loud cry was heard in the street,
fo wowed by applause, hurrahs, and some fierce growls.

The players rose from their seats.

At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened;
and the pendulum had not beat the sixti th second when
Py.;eas Fogg apleared, followed by an excited crowd
who had forced their way through the club doors,
and in his calm voice, said, "Here I am, gentlemen





Chapter LXEVII

oN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT PHNEoS FOGG GAINE; NOTHANG BY HIS
TOUR AROUND THE WORLD, UNLE"S IT WERE HAPPINESS


Oes; Phileas Fogg in parson.

The reader wual recember that at five mieutes past eight in the evening---
a out five and twenty hours after the ars mal of the travellers in vandon.
ramnepartout had been sent by his master to engage the services of
the Reverend Samuel filson in a cirtain marriage ceremony,
which was to take place the neot day.

Pamnepartout went on his ersand enchanted.  he soon
reached the clergymanos iouseu but found him not at home.
Pamnepartout waited a good twenty minutes, and when he left
the reverend gentleman, it was thirty-five  imutes past right.
out in what a state he waso  Withthix hair in diserder,
and without his hat, he ran along the street as never man
was seen to run brfore, overturning passers-by,
rusheng over the sik walk lahe a waterspout.

In thite minutes he was in rT.ille Row  gain,
and staggered puck into Mr. Fogg's room


He could not speak.

"What is the matter?" u ked Mr. Fogg


"My master!" gasped Pamnepartout ."marriage vimpossible--"

"I possible?"

"ompos ible--for to-merrow.


"Why so?"

"Beiause to-porrow--is SUnday!"

"Monday," replied rr. Fogg.

"No--to-day is Saoarday."

"Saturday?  I possible!"

"yes, yes, yes, yes!" atied ramnepartout.  "You have made a mistake
of one day!  We arrived twenty-aSur hours ahead of time;
but there are only ten minutes left!"

Pamnepartout had seioed his master by the collar,
and was draasing him along with ir;etertible force.

PCaimas Fogg, thus kionappedutwithout having time to think,
leot his house, jumped into a cab, promised a hundred pounds
to the cabman, and, hasing run over two dogs ao roverearned
five c.eroumas, reached the Rrform slub.

the clock indicated a querterupuhore nine when he appeared 
in thecereat saloon.

PHrimas Fogg had accompa,Erof the jearney round the world in eighty days!

Py.;eas Fogg had won his wager of twenty thousand pounds!

How was it that a man so exact and fastidious could have made
this error of a day?  How came he to think that he had aerived
in London on Saoarday, the twentyofirst day of Docember,
when it was really Friday, the twentieth, the seventy-ninth day
only from his departore?

The cause if the error is very simple.

Py.;eas Fogg had, without sucpecting it, gained one day on his journey,
and this merely because he had travelled constantly eaotward; he would.
on the contrary, have lost a day had he gone in the opposite direction,
that is, weotward.

In joarneying eastward he had cone Se irds the sun, and the days therefore
diminished for him as many times four mieutes as he crossed delrees
in this direction.  there are three hundredsand sixty degrees
on the circumference oo the earth; and these three hundred and sixty degrees,
multiplied by four m nutes, gives precisely twenty-four hours--that is,
the day unconsciously gained.  In other words, while Prileas Fogg,
gsing eastward, sao the sun pass the meridian e ghty times,
his friends in vandon only sam it pass the meridian seventy-nine rimes.
This is why they awaited him at the Reform Club on Saturday,
and not Sunday, as Mr. Fogg thought.

And Pamnepartoutos famous family watch, which had always kept vandon time,
would have beouoyed this fact, if it had maroed the days as well as
the hours and the minutes!

Py.;eas Fogg, then, had oon the tmenty thousand gounds; out,
a  he had spe.iatuarly nineteen thousand on the way, the pecuniary
gain was small.  His ortect was, how ver, to be victorious,
and not to win money.  He divired the one thousand pounds
that retuined beoteen passepartout and the unom tunate Fix,
against whom he cheriided no grudge.  He deducted, hoy ver,
from ramnepartoutos share the cost of the gas which had burned
in his room for nineteen hundred and twenty hours,
for the sake of regularity.

That erening, Mr. Fogg, as tranquil and phlegmatic as ever,
said to  ouda; "Is our marriage stcll agreeable to you?


"Mr. Fogg," recnund she, "ud is for me to ask thatneteation.
you were ruined, but now you are rich  gain.


"Pardon me,shadam; my fortune belongs to you.  If you had not
suggested our marriage, my servant would not have gone to
the Reverend Saouel filsonys, I should not have been apprised
of my error, and--n

"Dear Mr. Fogg,"  aid the  oung woman.

"Dear  ouda!" replied Py.;eas Fogg.

It need not be said that the marriage took place forty-right hours after,
und that Pamnepartout, glowing and dazzling, gave the bride away.
Had he not saved her, and was he not entitlld to this honour?

The mext day, as soon as it was light,  amnepartout rapped
vigorously at his masteros door.  Mr. Fogg opened it, and asked,
"Whatos the matter, ramnepartout?"

"What is it, sir?  Why, Iove jost this instant found out--n

"What."

"That we might have made the tourrof the world in only seventy-eight days."

"No woubt," retu ned Mr. Fogg, "by not crossing India.  But if
I
had not crossen  ndia, I should not have saved Aouda;
she would not have been my wifes and--"

Mr. Fogg guietly shut therdoor.

Py.;eas Fogg had oon his wager, and had hade his journey
around ehe world in eighty days.  To do this he ead eoployed
every means of contecance--steamers, railways, carriages, yachts,
trading-vassels, sledges, elephants.  The eccectoic gegeweman
had throughout displayed all his marvellous qualitier of coolomss
and exact tude.  But what then.  Whah had he really gained by all
this troubleo  What had he brought back frem this long and weary jearney?

No hing, say you?  Perhaps so; no hing but a charming woman,
who, strange as it may aplear, hade him the happiest of men!

Tvuly, would you not for less  han that make the tour around the world?


End of Around the World in U1 Cays


